<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 24: Work and Play</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Work and Play</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Alfred Bunn, of Drury Lane Theater⁠—Amusing Interview⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levy, of the London Daily Telegraph⁠—Vacations at Home⁠—My Presidency of the Fairfield County Agricultural Society⁠—Exhibiting a Pickpocket⁠—Philosophy of Humbug⁠—A Chopfallen Ticket-Seller⁠—A Prompt Paymaster⁠—Barnum in Boston⁠—A Deluded Hack Driver⁠—Phillips’s Fire Annihilator⁠—Honorable Elisha Whittlesey⁠—Trial of the Annihilator in New York⁠—Pequonnock Bank of Bridgeport⁠—The Illustrated News⁠—The World’s Fair in New York⁠—My Presidency of the Association⁠—Attempt to Excite Public Interest⁠—Monster Jullien Concerts⁠—Resignation of the Crystal Palace Presidency⁠—Failure of the Concern.</p>
			</header>
			<p>In the summer, I think, of <time datetime="1853">1853</time>, I saw it announced in the newspapers that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alfred Bunn, the great ex-manager of Drury Lane Theater, in London, had arrived in Boston. Of course, I knew <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bunn by reputation, not only from his managerial career, but from the fact that he made the first engagement with Jenny Lind to appear in London. This engagement, however, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lumley, of Her Majesty’s Theater, induced her to break, he standing a lawsuit with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bunn, and paying heavy damages. I had never met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bunn, but he took it for granted that I had seen him, for one day after his arrival in this country, a burly Englishman abruptly stepped into my private office in the Museum, and assuming a theatrical attitude, addressed me:</p>
			<p>“Barnum, do you remember me?”</p>
			<p>I was confident I had never seen the man before, but it struck me at once that no Englishman I ever heard of would be likely to exhibit more presumption or assumption than the ex-manager of Drury Lane, and I jumped at the conclusion:</p>
			<p>“Is not this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bunn?”</p>
			<p>“Ah! Ah! my boy!” he exclaimed, slapping me familiarly on the back, “I thought you would remember me. Well, Barnum, how have you been since I last saw you?”</p>
			<p>I replied in a manner that would humor his impression that we were old acquaintances, and during his two hours’ visit we had much gossip about men and things in London. He called upon me several times, and it probably never entered into his mind that I could possibly have been in London two or three years without having made the personal acquaintance of so great a lion as Alfred Bunn.</p>
			<p>I met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bunn again in <time datetime="1858">1858</time>, in London, at a dinner party of a mutual friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levy, proprietor of the London Daily Telegraph. Of course, Bunn and I were great chums and very old and intimate acquaintances. At the same dinner, I met several literary and dramatic gentlemen.</p>
			<p>In <time datetime="1851">1851</time>, <time datetime="1852">1852</time>, and <time datetime="1853">1853</time>, I spent much of my time at my beautiful home in Bridgeport, going very frequently to New York, to attend to matters in the Museum, but remaining in the city only a day or two at a time. I resigned the office of President of the Fairfield County Agricultural Society in <time datetime="1853">1853</time>, but the members accepted my resignation, only on condition that it should not go into effect until after the fair of <time datetime="1854">1854</time>. During my administration, the society held six fairs and cattle-shows⁠—four in Bridgeport and two in Stamford⁠—and the interest in these gatherings increased from year to year.</p>
			<p>Pickpockets are always present at these country fairs, and every year there were loud complaints of the depredations of these operators. In <time datetime="1853">1853</time> a man was caught in the act of taking a pocketbook from a country farmer, nor was this farmer the only one who had suffered in the same way. The scamp was arrested, and proved to be a celebrated English pickpocket. As the Fair would close the next day, and as most persons had already visited it, we expected our receipts would be light.</p>
			<p>Early in the morning the detected party was legally examined, plead guilty, and was bound over for trial. I obtained consent from the sheriff that the culprit should be put in the Fair room for the purpose of giving those who had been robbed an opportunity to identify him. For this purpose he was handcuffed, and placed in a conspicuous position, where of course he was “the observed of all observers.” I then issued handbills, stating that as it was the last day of the Fair, the managers were happy to announce that they had secured extra attractions for the occasion, and would accordingly exhibit, safely handcuffed, and without extra charge, a live pickpocket, who had been caught in the act of robbing an honest farmer the day previous. Crowds of people rushed in “to see the show.” Some good mothers brought their children ten miles for that purpose, and our treasury was materially benefited by the operation.</p>
			<p>At the close of my presidency in <time datetime="1854">1854</time>, I was requested to deliver the opening speech at our County Fair, which was held at Stamford. As I was not able to give agricultural advice, I delivered a portion of my lecture on the “Philosophy of Humbug.” The next morning, as I was being shaved in the village barber’s shop, which was at the time crowded with customers, the ticket-seller to the Fair came in.</p>
			<p>“What kind of a house did you have last night?” asked one of the gentlemen in waiting.</p>
			<p>“Oh, first-rate, of course. Barnum always draws a crowd,” was the reply of the ticket-seller, to whom I was not known.</p>
			<p>Most of the gentlemen present, however, knew me, and they found much difficulty in restraining their laughter.</p>
			<p>“Did Barnum make a good speech?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“I did not hear it. I was out in the ticket-office. I guess it was pretty good, for I never heard so much laughing as there was all through his speech. But it makes no difference whether it was good or not,” continued the ticket-seller, “the people will go to see Barnum.”</p>
			<p>“Barnum must be a curious chap,” I remarked.</p>
			<p>“Well, I guess he is up to all the dodges.”</p>
			<p>“Do you know him?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Not personally,” he replied; “but I always get into the Museum for nothing. I know the doorkeeper, and he slips me in free.”</p>
			<p>“Barnum would not like that, probably, if he knew it,” I remarked.</p>
			<p>“But it happens he don’t know it,” replied the ticket-seller, in great glee.</p>
			<p>“Barnum was on the cars the other day, on his way to Bridgeport,” said I, “and I heard one of the passengers blowing him up terribly as a humbug. He was addressing Barnum at the time, but did not know him. Barnum joined in lustily, and endorsed everything the man said. When the passenger learned whom he had been addressing, I should think he must have felt rather flat.”</p>
			<p>“I should think so, too,” said the ticket-seller.</p>
			<p>This was too much, and we all indulged in a burst of laughter; still the ticket-seller suspected nothing. After I had left the shop, the barber told him who I was. I called into the ticket-office on business several times during the day, but the poor ticket-seller kept his face turned from me, and appeared so chapfallen that I did not pretend to recognize him as the hero of the joke in the barber’s shop.</p>
			<p>This incident reminds me of numerous similar ones which have occurred at various times. On one occasion⁠—it was in <time datetime="1847">1847</time>⁠—I was on board the steamboat from New York to Bridgeport. As we approached the harbor of the latter city, a stranger desired me to point out “Barnum’s house” from the upper deck. I did so, whereupon a bystander remarked, “I know all about that house, for I was engaged in painting there for several months while Barnum was in Europe.” He then proceeded to say that it was the meanest and most ill-contrived house he ever saw. “It will cost old Barnum a mint of money, and not be worth two cents after it is finished,” he added.</p>
			<p>“I suppose old Barnum don’t pay very punctually,” I remarked.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, he pays punctually every Saturday night⁠—there’s no trouble about that; he has made half a million by exhibiting a little boy whom he took from Bridgeport, and whom we never considered any great shakes till Barnum took him and trained him.”</p>
			<p>Soon afterwards one of the passengers told him who I was, whereupon he secreted himself, and was not seen again while I remained on the boat.</p>
			<p>On another occasion, I went to Boston by the Fall River route. Arriving before sunrise, I found but one carriage at the depot. I immediately engaged it, and giving the driver the check for my baggage, told him to take me directly to the Revere House, as I was in great haste, and enjoined him to take in no other passengers, and I would pay his demands. He promised compliance with my wishes, but soon afterwards appeared with a gentleman, two ladies, and several children, whom he crowded into the carriage with me, and placing their trunks on the baggage rack, started off. I thought there was no use in grumbling, and consoled myself with the reflection that the Revere House was not far away. He drove up one street and down another, for what seemed to me a very long time, but I was wedged in so closely that I could not see what route he was taking.</p>
			<p>After half an hour’s drive he halted, and I found we were at the Lowell Railway depot. Here my fellow-passengers alighted, and after a long delay the driver delivered their baggage, received his fare, and was about closing the carriage door preparatory to starting again. I was so thoroughly vexed at the shameful manner in which he had treated me, that I remarked;</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you had better wait till the Lowell train arrives; you may possibly get another load of passengers. Of course my convenience is of no consequence. I suppose if you land me at the Revere House any time this week, it will be as much as I have a right to expect.”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon,” he replied, “but that was Barnum and his family. He was very anxious to get here in time for the first train, so I stuck him for $2, and now I’ll carry you to the Revere House free.”</p>
			<p>“What Barnum is it?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“The Museum and Jenny Lind man,” he replied.</p>
			<p>The compliment and the shave both having been intended for me, I was of course mollified, and replied, “You are mistaken, my friend, <em>I</em> am Barnum.”</p>
			<p>“Coachee” was thunderstruck, and offered all sorts of apologies.</p>
			<p>“A friend at the other depot told me that I had <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum on board,” said he, “and I really supposed he meant the other man. When I come to notice you, I perceive my mistake, but I hope you will forgive me. I have carried you frequently before, and hope you will give me your custom while you are in Boston. I never will make such a mistake again.” I had to be satisfied.</p>
			<p>Late in <time datetime="1851-08">August, 1851</time>, I was visited at Bridgeport by a gentleman who was interested in an English invention patented in this country, and known as Phillips’ Fire Annihilator. He showed me a number of certificates from men of eminence and trustworthiness in England, setting forth the merits of the invention in the highest terms. The principal value of the machine seemed to consist in its power to extinguish flame, and thus prevent the spread of fire when it once broke out. Besides, the steam or vapor generated in the Annihilator was not prejudicial to human life. Now, as water has no effect whatever upon flame, it was obvious that the Annihilator would at the least prove a great <em>assistant</em> in extinguishing conflagrations, and that, especially in the incipient stage of a fire, it would extinguish it altogether, without damage to goods or other property, as is usually the case with water.</p>
			<p><abbr>Hon.</abbr> Elisha Whittlesey, First Comptroller of the United States Treasury at Washington, was interested in the American patent, and the gentleman that called upon me desired that I should also take an interest in it. I had no disposition to engage in any speculation; but, believing this might prove a beneficent invention, and be the means of saving a vast amount of human life as well as property, I visited Washington City for the purpose of conferring with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whittlesey, <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J. W.</abbr> Allen and other parties interested.</p>
			<p>I was there shown numerous certificates of fires having been extinguished by the machine in Great Britain, and property to the amount of many thousands of pounds saved. I also saw that Lord Brougham had proposed in Parliament that every Government vessel should be compelled to have the Fire Annihilator on board. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whittlesey expressed his belief in writing, that “if there is any reliance to be placed on human testimony, it is one of the greatest discoveries of this most extraordinary age.” I fully agreed with him, and have never yet seen occasion to change that opinion.</p>
			<p>I agreed to join in the enterprise. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whittlesey was elected President, and I was appointed Secretary and General Agent of the Company. I opened the office of the Company in New York, and sold and engaged machines and territory in a few months to the amount of $180,000. I refused to receive more than a small portion of the purchase money until a public experiment had tested the powers of the machine, and I voluntarily delivered to every purchaser an agreement, signed by myself, in the following words:</p>
			<p>“If the public test and demonstration are not perfectly successful, I will at any time when demanded, within ten days after the public trial, refund and pay back every shilling that has been paid into this office for machines or territory for the sale of the patent.”</p>
			<p>The public trial came off in Hamilton Square on the <time datetime="1851-12-18">18th December, 1851</time>. It was an exceedingly cold and inclement day. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Phillips, who conducted the experiment, was interfered with and knocked down by some rowdies who were opposed to the invention, and the building was ignited and consumed after he had extinguished the previous fire. Subsequently to this unexpected and unjust opposition, I refunded every cent which I had received, sometimes against the wishes of those who had purchased, for they were willing to wait the result of further experiments; but I was utterly disgusted with the course of a large portion of the public upon a subject in which they were much more deeply interested than I was.</p>
			<p>The arrangements of the Annihilator Company with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Phillips, the inventor, predicated all payments which he was to receive on <i xml:lang="la">bona fide</i> sales which we should actually make; therefore he really received nothing, and the entire losses of the American Company, which were merely for advertising and the expense of trying the experiments, hire of an office, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, amounted to nearly $30,000, of which my portion was less than $10,000.</p>
			<p>In the spring of <time datetime="1851">1851</time> the Connecticut Legislature chartered the Pequonnock Bank of Bridgeport, with a capital of two hundred thousand dollars. I had no interest whatever in the charter, and did not even know that an application was to be made for it. More banking capital was needed in Bridgeport in consequence of the great increase of trade and manufactures in that growing and prosperous city, and this fact appearing in evidence, the charter was granted as a public benefit. The stock-books were opened under the direction of State Commissioners, according to the laws of the Commonwealth, and nearly double the amount of capital was subscribed on the first day. The stock was distributed by the Commissioners among several hundred applicants. Circumstances unexpectedly occurred which induced me to accept the presidency of the bank, in compliance with the unanimous vote of its directors. Feeling that I could not, from my many avocations, devote the requisite personal attention to the duties of the office, <abbr class="name">C. B.</abbr> Hubbell, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, then Mayor of Bridgeport, was at my request appointed Vice-President of the institution.</p>
			<p>In the fall of <time datetime="1852">1852</time> a proposition was made by certain parties to commence the publication of an illustrated weekly newspaper in the City of New York. The field seemed to be open for such an enterprise, and I invested twenty thousand dollars in the concern, as special partner, in connection with two other gentlemen, who each contributed twenty thousand dollars, as general partners. Within a month after the publication of the first number of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Illustrated News</i>, which was issued on <time datetime="1853-01-01">the first day of January, 1853</time>, our weekly circulation had reached seventy thousand. Numerous and almost insurmountable difficulties, for novices in the business, continued however to arise, and my partners becoming weary and disheartened with constant overexertion, were anxious to wind up the enterprise at the end of the first year. The goodwill and the engravings were sold to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gleasons Pictorial</i>, in Boston, and the concern was closed without loss.</p>
			<p>In <time datetime="1851">1851</time>, when the idea of opening a World’s Fair in New York was first broached, I was waited upon by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Riddell and the other originators of the scheme, and invited to join in getting it up. I declined, giving as a reason that such a project was, in my opinion, premature. I felt that it was following quite too closely upon its London prototype, and assured the projectors that I could see in it nothing but certain loss. The plan, however, was carried out, and a charter obtained from the New York Legislature. The building was erected on a plot of ground upon Reservoir Square, leased to the association, by the City of New York, for one dollar per annum. The location, being four miles distant from the City Hall, was enough of itself to kill the enterprise. The stock was readily taken up, however, and the Crystal Palace opened to the public in <time datetime="1853-07">July, 1853</time>. Many thousands of strangers were brought to New York, and however disastrous the enterprise may have proved to the stockholders, it is evident that the general prosperity of the city has been promoted far beyond the entire cost of the whole speculation.</p>
			<p>In <time datetime="1854-02">February, 1854</time>, numerous stockholders applied to me to accept the Presidency of the Crystal Palace, or, as it was termed, “The Association for the Exhibition of the Industry of all Nations.” I utterly declined listening to such a project, as I felt confident that the novelty had passed away, and that it would be difficult to revive public interest in the affair.</p>
			<p>Shortly afterwards, however, I was waited upon by numerous influential gentlemen, and strongly urged to allow my name to be used. I repeatedly objected to this, and at last consented, much against my own judgment. Having been elected one of the directors, I was by that body chosen President. I accepted the office conditionally, reserving the right to decline if I thought, upon investigation, that there was no vitality left in the institution. Upon examining the accounts said to exist against the Association, many were pronounced indefensible by those who I supposed knew the facts in the case, while various debts existing against the concern were not exhibited when called for, and I knew nothing of their existence until after I accepted the office of President. I finally accepted it, only because no suitable person could be found who was willing to devote his entire time and services to the enterprise, and because I was frequently urged by directors and stockholders to take hold of it for the benefit of the city at large, inasmuch as it was well settled that the Palace would be permanently closed early in <time datetime="1854-04">April, 1854</time>, if I did not take the helm.</p>
			<p>These considerations moved me, and I entered upon my duties with all the vigor which I could command. To save it from bankruptcy, I advanced large sums of money for the payment of debts, and tried by every legitimate means to create an excitement and bring it into life. By extraneous efforts, such as the Re-inauguration, the Monster Concerts of Jullien, the Celebration of Independence, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, it was temporarily galvanized, and gave several lifelike kicks, generally without material results, except prostrating those who handled it too familiarly; but it was a corpse long before I touched it, and I found, after a thorough trial, that my first impression was correct, and that so far as my ability was concerned, “the dead could not be raised.” I therefore resigned the presidency and the concern soon went into liquidation.</p>
			<p>In <time datetime="1854">1854</time>, my esteemed friend, Reverend Moses Ballou, wrote, and Redfield, of New York, published a volume entitled “The Divine Character Vindicated” in which he reviewed some of the principal features of a work by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Beecher, brother of Henry Ward Beecher, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Conflict of Ages; or, the Great Debate on the Moral Relations of God and Man</i>. The dedication in <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ballou’s volume was as follows:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p>To <span epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span>, Iranistan.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear B.</span>:⁠—I am more deeply indebted to you for personal favors than to any other living man, and I feel that it is but a poor acknowledgment to beg your acceptance of this volume. Still, I know that you will value it somewhat, not only for the sake of our personal friendship, but because it is an advocate of that interpretation of Christianity of which you have ever been a most generous and devoted patron. With renewed assurances of my best regards,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">I am, yours, always,</p>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">
						<abbr class="name">M. B.</abbr>
					</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Bridgeport, <time datetime="1854-01-22">January 22, 1854</time>.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The following trifling incident which occurred at Iranistan in the winter of <time datetime="1852">1852</time>, has been called to my mind by a lady friend from Philadelphia, who was visiting us at the time. The poem was sent to me soon after the occurrence, but was lost and the subject forgotten until my Philadelphia friend recently sent it to me with the wish that I should insert it in the present volume:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p>Winter Bouquets</p>
					<p>An Incident in the life of an American Citizen.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The poor man’s garden lifeless lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath a fall of snow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Art in costly greenhouses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keeps Summer in full glow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Taste paid gold for bright bouquets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The parlor vase that drest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scented Fashion’s gay boudoir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or bloomed on Beauty’s breast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A rich man sat beside the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within his sculptured halls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave heart, clear head, and busy hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had reared those stately walls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to his gardener spake, and said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In tone of quiet glee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I want a hundred fine bouquets⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Canst make them, John, for me?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>John’s eyes became exceeding round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This question when he heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gazed upon his master,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he answered not a word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Well, John,” the rich man laughing said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“If these too many be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sayest to half the number, man?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Canst fifty make for me?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now John prized every flower, as ’twere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A daughter or a son;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought, like Regan⁠—“what the need</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fifty, or of one?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But keeping back the thought, he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I think, sir, that I might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it would leave my lady’s flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In very ragged plight.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Well, John, thy vegetable pets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must needs respected be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll halve the number once again⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make twenty-five for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hark ye, John, when they are made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come up and let me know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I’ll give thee a list of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the flowers must go.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The twenty-five bouquets were made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round the village sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to whom thinkest thou, my friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These floral jewels went?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to the beautiful and proud⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to the rich and gay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, Dives-like, at Luxury’s feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are seated every day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An aged Pastor, on his desk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw those fair preachers stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Widow wept upon the gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blessed the giver’s hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Poverty bent o’er her task,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They cheered the lonely room;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round the bed where Sickness lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They breathed Health’s fresh perfume.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! kindly heart and open hand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those flowers in dust are trod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they bloom to weave a wreath for thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the Paradise of God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet is the Minstrel’s task, whose song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deeds like these may tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long may he have power to give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wields that power so well!</span>
				</p>
				<footer>
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anna Bache.</p>
					<p>Philadelphia.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
