<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22: Close of the Campaign</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Close of the Campaign</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Penitent Ticket Purchasers—Visit to the “Hermitage”—“April Fool” Fun—The Mammoth Cave—Signor Salvi—George D. Prentice—Performance in a Pork House—Ruse at Cincinnati—Annoyances at Pittsburg—le Grand Smith’s Grand Joke—Return to New York—The Final Concerts in Castle Garden and Metropolitan Hall—The Advisers Appear—The Ninety-Third Concert—My Offer to Close the Engagement—Miss Lind’s Letter Accepting My Proposition—Story About an “Improper Place”—Jenny’s Concerts on Her Own Account—Her Marriage to Mr. Otto Goldschmidt—Cordial Relations Between Mrs. Lind Goldschmidt and Myself—At Home Again—Statement of the Total Receipts of the Concerts.</p>
			</header>
			<p>AFTER five concerts in St. Louis, we went to Nashville, Tennessee, where we gave our sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh concerts in this country. At the first ticket auction in that city, the excitement was considerable and the bidding spirited, as was generally the case. After the auction was over, one of my men, happening in at a dry-goods store in the town, heard the proprietor say, “I’ll give five dollars to any man who will take me out and give me a good horse-whipping! I deserve it, and am willing to pay for having it done. To think that I should have been such a fool as to have paid forty-eight dollars for four tickets for my wife, two daughters, and myself, to listen to music for only two hours, makes me mad with myself, and I want to pay somebody for giving me a thundering good horse-whipping!” I am not sure that others have not experienced a somewhat similar feeling, when they became cool and rational, and the excitement of novelty and competition had passed away.<a id="page_345" name="page_345"/></p>
			<p>While at Nashville, Jenny Lind, accompanied by my daughter, Mrs. Lyman, and myself, visited “the Hermitage,” the late residence of General Jackson. On that occasion, for the first time that season, we heard the wild mocking-birds singing in the trees. This gave Jenny Lind great delight, as she had never before heard them sing except in their wire-bound cages.</p>
			<p>The first of April occurred while we were in Nashville. I was considerably annoyed during the forenoon by the calls of members of the company who came to me under the belief that I had sent for them. After dinner I concluded to give them all a touch of “April fool.” The following article, which appeared the next morning in the Nashville <i>Daily American</i>, my amanuensis having imparted the secret to the editor, will show how it was done:</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>“A series of laughable jokes came off yesterday at the Veranda in honor of All Fools’ Day. Mr. Barnum was at the bottom of the mischief. He managed in some mysterious manner to obtain a lot of blank telegraphic despatches and envelopes from one of the offices in this city, and then went to work and manufactured ‘astounding intelligence’ for most of the parties composing the Jenny Lind suite. Almost every person in the company received a telegraphic despatch written under the direction of Barnum. Mr. Barnum’s daughter was informed that her mother, her cousin, and several other relatives were waiting for her in Louisville, and various other important and extraordinary items of domestic intelligence were communicated to her. Mr. Le Grand Smith was told by a despatch from his father that his native village in Connecticut was in ashes, including his own homestead, etc. Several of Barnum’s employees had most liberal offers of engagements from banks and other institutions at the North. Burke, and others of the musical professors, were offered princely salaries by opera managers, and many of them received most tempting inducements to proceed immediately to the World’s Fair in London.</p>
				<p>“One married gentleman in Mr. Barnum’s suite received the gratifying intelligence that he had for two days been the father of a pair of bouncing boys (mother and children doing well), an event which he had been anxiously looking for during the week, though on a somewhat more limited scale. In fact, nearly every person in the party engaged by Barnum received some extraordinary telegraphic intelligence, and as the great impressario managed to have the despatches delivered simultaneously, each recipient was for some time busily occupied with his own personal news.</p>
				<p>“By and by each began to tell his neighbor his good or bad tidings; and each was, of course, rejoiced or grieved according to circumstances. Several gave Mr.<a id="page_346" name="page_346"/> Barnum notice of their intention to leave him, in consequence of better offers; and a number of them sent off telegraphic despatches and letters by mail, in answer to those received.</p>
				<p>“The man who had so suddenly become the father of twins, telegraphed to his wife to ‘be of good cheer,’ and that he would ‘start for home to-morrow.’ At a late hour last night the secret had not got out, and we presume that many of the victims will first learn from our columns that they have been taken in by Barnum and All Fools’ Day!”</p>
			</div>
			<p>From Nashville, Jenny Lind and a few friends went by way of the Mammoth Cave to Louisville, while the rest of the party proceeded by steamboat.</p>
			<p>While in Havana, I engaged Signor Salvi for a few months, to begin about the 10th of April. He joined us at Louisville, and sang in the three concerts there, with great satisfaction to the public. Mr. George D. Prentice, of the Louisville <i>Journal</i>, and his beautiful and accomplished lady, who had contributed much to the pleasure of Miss Lind and our party, accompanied us to Cincinnati.</p>
			<p>A citizen of Madison had applied to me on our first arrival in Louisville, for a concert in that place. I replied that the town was too small to afford it, whereupon he offered to take the management of it into his own hands, and pay me $5,000 for the receipts. The last concert at Louisville, and the concerts at Natchez and Wheeling were given under a similar agreement, though with better pecuniary results than at Madison. As the steamer from Louisville to Cincinnati would arrive at Madison about sundown, and would wait long enough for us to give a concert, I agreed to his proposition.</p>
			<p>We were not a little surprised to learn upon arriving, that the concert must be given in a “pork house”—a capacious shed which had been fitted up and decorated for the occasion. We concluded, however, that if the<a id="page_347" name="page_347"/> inhabitants were satisfied with the accommodations, we ought not to object. The person who had contracted for the concert came $1,300 short of his agreement, which I consequently lost, and at ten o’clock we were again on board the fine steamer “Ben Franklin” bound for Cincinnati.</p>
			<p>The next morning the crowd upon the wharf was immense. I was fearful that an attempt to repeat the New Orleans ruse with my daughter would be of no avail, as the joke had been published in the Cincinnati papers; so I gave my arm to Miss Lind, and begged her to have no fears, for I had hit upon an expedient which would save her from annoyance. We then descended the plank to the shore, and as soon as we had touched it, Le Grand Smith called out from the boat, as if he had been one of the passengers, “That’s no go, Mr. Barnum; you can’t pass your daughter off for Jenny Lind this time.”</p>
			<p>The remark elicited a peal of merriment from the crowd, several persons calling out, “That won’t do, Barnum! you may fool the New Orleans folks, but you can’t come it over the ‘Buckeyes.’ We intend to stay here until you bring out Jenny Lind!” They readily allowed me to pass with the lady whom they supposed to be my daughter, and in five minutes afterwards the Nightingale was complimenting Mr. Coleman upon the beautiful and commodious apartments which were devoted to her in the Burnett House. The crowd remained an hour on the wharf before they would be convinced that the person whom they took for my daughter was in fact the veritable Swede. When this was discovered, a general laugh followed the exclamation from one of the victims, “Well, Barnum has humbugged us after all!”<a id="page_348" name="page_348"/></p>
			<p>In passing up the river to Pittsburg, the boat waited four hours to enable us to give a concert in Wheeling. It was managed by a couple of gentlemen in that city, who purchased it for five thousand dollars in advance, by which they made a handsome profit for their trouble. The concert was given in a church.</p>
			<p>At Pittsburg, the open space surrounding the concert room became crowded with thousands of persons, who, foolishly refusing to accommodate each other by listening to the music, disturbed the concert and determined us to leave the next morning for Baltimore, instead of giving a second concert that had been advertised.</p>
			<p>Le Grand Smith here paid me off for my “April fool” joke. He induced a female of his acquaintance to call on me and reveal an arrangement which she pretended accidentally to have overheard between some scoundrels, who were resolved to stop our stage coach on the Alleghany mountains and commit highway robbery. The story seemed incredible, and yet the woman related it with so much apparent sincerity, that I swallowed the bait, and remitting to New York all the money I had, except barely enough to defray our expenses to Baltimore, I purchased several revolvers for such members of the company as were not already provided, and we left Pittsburg armed to the teeth! Fortunately, Jenny Lind and several of the company had left before I made this grand discovery, and hence she was saved any apprehensions on the subject. It is needless to say we found no use for our firearms.</p>
			<p>We reached New York early in May, 1851, and gave fourteen concerts in Castle Garden and Metropolitan Hall. The last of these made the ninety-second regular<a id="page_349" name="page_349"/> concert under our engagement. Jenny Lind had now again reached the atmosphere of her legal and other “advisers,” and I soon discovered the effects of their influence. I, however, cared little what course they advised her to pursue. I indeed wished they would prevail upon her to close with her hundredth concert, for I had become weary with constant excitement and unremitting exertions. I was confident that if she undertook to give concerts on her own account, she would be imposed upon and harassed in a thousand ways; yet I felt it would be well for her to have a trial at it, if she saw fit to credit her advisers’ assurance that I had not managed the enterprise as successfully as it might have been done.</p>
			<p>At about the eighty-fifth concert, therefore, I was most happy to learn from her lips that she had concluded to pay the forfeiture of twenty-five thousand dollars, and terminate the concerts with the one hundredth.</p>
			<p>We went to Philadelphia, where I had advertised the ninety-second, ninety-third, and ninety-fourth concerts, and had engaged the large National Theatre on Chestnut Street. It had been used for equestrian and theatrical entertainments, but was now thoroughly cleansed and fitted up by Max Maretzek for Italian opera. It was a convenient place for our purpose. One of her “advisers,” a subordinate in her employ, who was already itching for the position of manager, made the selection of this building a pretext for creating dissatisfaction in the mind of Miss Lind. I saw the influences which were at work, and not caring enough for the profits of the remaining seven concerts, to continue the engagement at the risk of disturbing the friendly feelings which had hitherto uninterruptedly existed between<a id="page_350" name="page_350"/> that lady and myself, I wrote her a letter offering to relinquish the engagement, if she desired it, at the termination of the concert which was to take place that evening, upon her simply allowing me a thousand dollars per concert for the seven which would yet remain to make up the hundred, besides paying me the sum stipulated as a forfeiture for closing the engagement at the one-hundredth concert. Towards evening I received the following reply:</p>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p class="nind">“To P. T. Barnum, Esq.<br/> </p>
				<p>“My Dear Sir:—I accept your proposition to close our contract to-night, at the end of the ninety-third concert, on condition of my paying you seven thousand dollars, in addition to the sum I forfeit under the condition of finishing the engagement at the end of one hundred concerts.</p>
				<p class="c">“I am, dear Sir, yours truly,<br/> </p>
				<p>“Jenny Lind,<br/> </p>
				<p>“Philadelphia, 9th of June, 1851.”</p>
			</div>
			<p>I met her at the concert in the evening, and she was polite and friendly as ever. Between the first and second parts of the concert, I introduced General Welch, the lessee of the National Theatre, who informed her that he was quite willing to release me from my engagement of the building, if she did not desire it longer. She replied, that upon trial, she found it much better than she expected, and she would therefore retain it for the remainder of the concerts.</p>
			<p>In the mean time, her advisers had been circulating the story that I had compelled her to sing in an improper place, and when they heard she had concluded to remain there, they beset her with arguments against it, until at last she consented to remove her concerts to a smaller hall.</p>
			<p>I had thoroughly advertised the three concerts, in the newspapers within a radius of one hundred miles from Philadelphia, and had sent admission tickets to the editors.<a id="page_351" name="page_351"/> On the day of the second concert, one of the new agents, who had indirectly aided in bringing about the dissolution of our engagement, refused to recognize these tickets. I urged upon him the injustice of such a course, but received no satisfaction. I then stated the fact to Miss Lind, and she gave immediate orders that these tickets should be received. Country editors’ tickets, which were offered after I left Philadelphia, were however refused by her agents (contrary to Miss Lind’s wish and knowledge), and the editors, having come from a distance with their wives, purchased tickets, and I subsequently remitted the money to numerous gentlemen, whose complimentary tickets were thus repudiated.</p>
			<p>Jenny Lind gave several concerts with varied success, and then retired to Niagara Falls, and afterwards to Northampton, Massachusetts. While sojourning at the latter place, she visited Boston and was married to Mr. Otto Goldschmidt, a German composer and pianist, to whom she was much attached, and who had studied music with her in Germany. He played several times in our concerts. He was a very quiet, inoffensive gentleman, and an accomplished musician.</p>
			<p>I met her several times after our engagement terminated. She was always affable. On one occasion, while passing through Bridgeport, she told me that she had been sadly harassed in giving her concerts. “People cheat me and swindle me very much,” said she, “and I find it very annoying to give concerts on my own account.”</p>
			<p>I was always supplied with complimentary tickets when she gave concerts in New York, and on the occasion of her last appearance in America, I visited her in her room back of the stage, and bade her and her<a id="page_352" name="page_352"/> husband adieu, with my best wishes. She expressed the same feeling to me in return. She told me she should never sing much, if any more, in public; but I reminded her that a good Providence had endowed her with a voice which enabled her to contribute in an eminent degree to the enjoyment of her fellow beings, and if she no longer needed the large sums of money which they were willing to pay for this elevating and delightful entertainment, she knew by experience what a genuine pleasure she would receive by devoting the money to the alleviation of the wants and sorrows of those who needed it.</p>
			<p>“Ah! Mr. Barnum,” she replied, “that is very true, and it would be ungrateful in me to not continue to use for the benefit of the poor and lowly, that gift which our kind Heavenly Father has so graciously bestowed upon me. Yes, I will continue to sing so long as my voice lasts, but it will be mostly for charitable objects, for I am thankful to say I have all the money which I shall ever need.” Pursuant to this resolution, the larger portion of the concerts which this noble lady has given since her return to Europe, have been for objects of benevolence.</p>
			<p>If she consents to sing for a charitable object in London, for instance, the fact is not advertised at all, but the tickets are readily disposed of in a private quiet way, at a guinea and half a guinea each.</p>
			<p>After so many months of anxiety, labor and excitement, in the Jenny Lind enterprise, it will readily be believed that I desired tranquility. I spent a week at Cape May, and then came home to Iranistan, where I remained during the entire summer.<a id="page_353" name="page_353"/></p>
			<p class="c">JENNY LIND CONCERTS.</p>
			<p class="c">TOTAL RECEIPTS, EXCEPTING OF CONCERTS DEVOTED TO CHARITY.</p>
			<table border="0" cellpadding="1" cellspacing="0" style="font-size:90%;" summary="">
				<tr>
					<td align="right">—</td>
					<td align="right">—</td>
					<td align="right">New York,</td>
					<td align="right">$17,864 05</td>
					<td rowspan="49" valign="top">No.</td>
					<td align="right">46.</td>
					<td align="right">Havana,</td>
					<td align="right">$2,931 95</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">—</td>
					<td align="right">—</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">14,203 03</td>
					<td align="right">47.</td>
					<td align="right">New Orleans,</td>
					<td align="right">12,599 85</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right"> </td>
					<td align="right"> </td>
					<td align="right"> </td>
					<td align="right">————</td>
					<td align="right">48.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,210 42</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td rowspan="46" valign="top">No.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">1.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">12,519 59</td>
					<td align="right">49.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,131 15</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">2.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">14,266 09</td>
					<td align="right">50.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,019 85</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">3.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">12,174 74</td>
					<td align="right">51.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,644 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">4.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">16,028 39</td>
					<td align="right">52.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">9,720 80</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">5.</td>
					<td align="left">Boston,</td>
					<td align="right">16,479 50</td>
					<td align="right">53.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,545 50</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">6.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">11,848 62</td>
					<td align="right">54.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,053 50</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">7.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,639 92</td>
					<td align="right">55.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,850 25</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">8.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,169 25</td>
					<td align="right">56.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,495 35</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">9.</td>
					<td align="left">Providence,</td>
					<td align="right">6,525 54</td>
					<td align="right">57.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,630 35</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">10.</td>
					<td align="left">Boston,</td>
					<td align="right">10,524 87</td>
					<td align="right">58.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,745 10</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">11.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,240 00</td>
					<td align="right">59.</td>
					<td align="left">Natchez,</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">12.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,586 00</td>
					<td align="right">60.</td>
					<td align="left">Memphis,</td>
					<td align="right">4,539 56</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">13.</td>
					<td align="left">Philadelphia,</td>
					<td align="right">9,291 25</td>
					<td align="right">61.</td>
					<td align="left">St. Louis,</td>
					<td align="right">7,811 85</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">14.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,547 00</td>
					<td align="right">62.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,961 92</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">15.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,458 65</td>
					<td align="right">63.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,708 70</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">16.</td>
					<td align="left">New York,</td>
					<td align="right">6,415 90</td>
					<td align="right">64.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,086 50</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">17.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,009 70</td>
					<td align="right">65.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,044 70</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">18.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,982 00</td>
					<td align="right">66.</td>
					<td align="left">Nashville,</td>
					<td align="right">7,786 30</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">19.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,007 10</td>
					<td align="right">67.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,248 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">20.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,334 20</td>
					<td align="right">68.</td>
					<td align="left">Louisville,</td>
					<td align="right">7,833 90</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">21.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">9,429 15</td>
					<td align="right">69.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,595 60</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">22.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">9,912 17</td>
					<td align="right">70.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">23.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,773 40</td>
					<td align="right">71.</td>
					<td align="left">Madison,</td>
					<td align="right">3,693 25</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">24.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,993 50</td>
					<td align="right">72.</td>
					<td align="left">Cincinnati,</td>
					<td align="right">9,339 75</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">25.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,670 15</td>
					<td align="right">73.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">11,001 50</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">26.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">9,840 33</td>
					<td align="right">74.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,446 30</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">27.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,097 15</td>
					<td align="right">75.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,954 18</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">28.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,263 30</td>
					<td align="right">76.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,500 40</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">29.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,570 25</td>
					<td align="right">77.</td>
					<td align="left">Wheeling,</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">30.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,646 45</td>
					<td align="right">78.</td>
					<td align="left">Pittsburg,</td>
					<td align="right">7,210 58</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">31.</td>
					<td align="left">Philadelphia,</td>
					<td align="right">5,480 75</td>
					<td align="right">79.</td>
					<td align="left">New York,</td>
					<td align="right">6,858 42</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">32.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,728 65</td>
					<td align="right">80.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,453 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">33.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,709 88</td>
					<td align="right">81.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,463 70</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">34.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,815 48</td>
					<td align="right">82.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,378 35</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">35.</td>
					<td align="left">Baltimore,</td>
					<td align="right">7,117 00</td>
					<td align="right">83.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,179 27</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">36.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,357 05</td>
					<td align="right">84.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,641 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">37.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,406 50</td>
					<td align="right">85.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,917 13</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">38.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,121 33</td>
					<td align="right">86.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,642 04</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">39.</td>
					<td align="left">Washington City,</td>
					<td align="right">6,878 55</td>
					<td align="right">87.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,738 75</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">40.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,507 05</td>
					<td align="right">88.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,335 28</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">41.</td>
					<td align="left">Richmond,</td>
					<td align="right">12,385 21</td>
					<td align="right">89.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,339 23</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">42.</td>
					<td align="left">Charleston,</td>
					<td align="right">6,775 00</td>
					<td align="right">90.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,087 03</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">43.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,653 75</td>
					<td align="right">91.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,717 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">44.</td>
					<td align="left">Havana,</td>
					<td align="right">4,666 17</td>
					<td align="right">92.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">9,525 80</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td align="right">45.</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">2,837 92</td>
					<td align="right">93.</td>
					<td align="left">Philadelphia,</td>
					<td align="right">3,852 75</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<div class="blockquot">
				<p>Charity Concerts.—Of Miss Lind’s half receipts of the first two Concerts, she devoted $10,000 to charity in New York. She afterwards gave Charity Concerts in Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, Havana, New Orleans, New York, and Philadelphia, and donated large sums for the like purposes in Richmond, Cincinnati, and elsewhere. There were also several Benefit Concerts, for the Orchestra, Le Grand Smith, and other persons and objects.</p>
			</div>
			<p>
				<a id="page_354" name="page_354"/>
			</p>
			<p class="c">RECAPITULATION.</p>
			<table border="0" cellpadding="1" cellspacing="0" style="font-size:90%;" summary="">
				<tr>
					<td>New York</td>
					<td align="right">35</td>
					<td align="right">Concerts.</td>
					<td align="right">Receipts,</td>
					<td align="right">$286,216 64</td>
					<td align="right">Average,</td>
					<td align="right">$8,177 50</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Philadelphia</td>
					<td align="right">8</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">48,884 41</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,110 55</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Boston</td>
					<td align="right">7</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">70,388 16</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,055 45</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Providence</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,525 54</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,525 54</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Baltimore</td>
					<td align="right">4</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">32,101 88</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,000 47</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Washington</td>
					<td align="right">2</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">15,385 60</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,692 80</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Richmond</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">12,385 21</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">12,385 21</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Charleston</td>
					<td align="right">2</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,428 75</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,214 37</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Havana</td>
					<td align="right">3</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">10,436 04</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,478 68</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>New Orleans</td>
					<td align="right">12</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">87,646 12</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,303 84</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Natchez</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Memphis</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,539 56</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">4,539 56</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>St. Louis</td>
					<td align="right">5</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">30,613 67</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,122 73</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Nashville</td>
					<td align="right">2</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">12,034 30</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,017 15</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Louisville</td>
					<td align="right">3</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">19,429 50</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">6,476 50</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Madison</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,693 25</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">3,693 25</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Cincinnati</td>
					<td align="right">5</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">44,242 13</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">8,848 43</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Wheeling</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">5,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Pittsburg</td>
					<td align="right">1</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,210 58</td>
					<td align="center">“</td>
					<td align="right">7,210 58</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Total</td>
					<td align="right" class="bt">95</td>
					<td align="right">Concerts.</td>
					<td align="right">Receipts,</td>
					<td align="right" class="bt">$712,161 34</td>
					<td align="right">Average,</td>
					<td align="right" class="bt">$7,496 43</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p class="c">JENNY LIND’S RECEIPTS.</p>
			<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="1" style="margin:auto auto;max-width:80%;" summary="">
				<tr>
					<td colspan="2">From the Total Receipts of Ninety-five Concerts</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">$712,161 34</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="2">Deduct the receipts of the first two, which, as between P. T. Barnum and Jenny Lind, were aside from the contract, and are not numbered in the Table</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">32,067 08</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="2">Total Receipts of Concerts from No. 1 to No. 93</td>
					<td align="right" class="bt" valign="bottom">$680,094 26</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Deduct the receipts of the 28 Concerts, each of which fell short of $5,500</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">$123,311 15</td>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Also deduct $5,500 for each of the remaining 65 Concerts</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">357,500 00 </td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">480,811 15</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="1"> Leaving the total excess, as above</td>
					<td class="bt"> </td>
					<td align="right" class="bt" valign="bottom">$199,283 11</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="3">Being equally divided, Miss Lind’s portion was</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">$99,641 55</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="3">I paid her $1,000 for each of the 93 Concerts</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">93,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="3">Also one half the receipts of the first two Concerts</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">16,033 54</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="3"> Amount paid to Jenny Lind</td>
					<td align="right" class="bt" valign="bottom">$208,675 09</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="2">She refunded to me as forfeiture, per contract, in case she withdrew after the 100th Concert</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">$25,000</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="2">She also paid me $1,000 each for the seven Concerts relinquished</td>
					<td align="right">7,000</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">32,000 00</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="2">Jenny Lind’s net avails of 95 Concerts</td>
					<td class="bt"> </td>
					<td align="right" class="bt" valign="bottom">$176,675 09</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="3">P. T. Barnum’s gross receipts, after paying Miss Lind</td>
					<td align="right" valign="bottom">535,486 25</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td colspan="3">Total Receipts of 95 Concerts</td>
					<td align="right" class="bt" valign="bottom">$712,161 34</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>Price of Tickets.—The highest prices paid for tickets were at auction as follows:—John N. Genin, in New York, $225; Ossian E. Dodge, in Boston, $625; Col. William C. Ross, in Providence, $650; M. A. Root, in Philadelphia, $625; Mr. D’Arcy, in New Orleans, $240; a keeper of a refreshment saloon in St. Louis, $150; a Daguerrotypist, in Baltimore, $100. I cannot now recall the names of the last two. After the sale of the first ticket, the premium usually fell to $20, and so downward in the scale of figures. The fixed price of tickets ranged from $7 to $3. Promenade tickets were from $2 to $1 each.<a id="page_355" name="page_355"/></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
