<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: Clouds and Sunshine</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Clouds and Sunshine</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Friends to the Rescue⁠—Money Offers Refused⁠—Benefits Declined⁠—Magnificent Offer of Prominent New York Citizens⁠—William <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Burton⁠—Laura Keene⁠—William Niblo⁠—General Tom Thumb⁠—Editorial Sympathy⁠—“A Word for Barnum” in Boston⁠—Letter from “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Partington”⁠—Citizens’ Meeting in Bridgeport⁠—Resolutions of Respect and Condolence⁠—My Letter on the Situation⁠—Tender of Fifty Thousand Dollars⁠—Magnitude of the Deception Practised Upon Me⁠—Proposition of Compromise with My Creditors⁠—A Trap Laid for Me in Philadelphia⁠—The Silver Lining to the Cloud⁠—The Blow a Benefit to My Family⁠—The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">E. H.</abbr> Chapin⁠—My Daughter Helen⁠—A Letter Worth Ten Thousand Dollars⁠—Our New Home in New York.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Happily, there is always more wheat than there is chaff. While my enemies and a few envious persons and misguided moralists were abusing and traducing me, my very misfortunes revealed to me hosts of hitherto unknown friends who tendered to me something more than mere sympathy. Funds were offered to me in unbounded quantity for the support of my family and to reestablish me in business. I declined these tenders because, on principle, I never accepted a money favor, unless I except the single receipt of a small sum which came to me by mail at this time and anonymously so that I could not return it. Even this small sum I at once devoted to charity towards one who needed the money far more than I did.</p>
			<p>The generosity of my friends urged me to accept “benefits” by the score, the returns of which would have made me quite independent. There was a proposition among leading citizens in New York to give a series of benefits which I felt obliged to decline though the movement in my favor deeply touched me. To show the class of men who sympathized with me in my misfortunes and also the ground which I took in the matter I venture to copy the following correspondence which appeared in the New York papers of the day:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">New York, June 2, 1856.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum:</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Sir</span>⁠—The financial ruin of a man of acknowledged energy and enterprise is a public calamity. The sudden blow, therefore, that has swept away, from a man like yourself, the accumulated wealth of years, justifies we think, the public sympathy. The better to manifest our sincere respect for your liberal example in prosperity, as well as exhibit our honest admiration of your fortitude under overwhelming reverses, we propose to give that sympathy a tangible expression by soliciting your acceptance of a series of benefits for your family, the result of which may possibly secure for your wife and children a future home, or at least rescue them from the more immediate consequences of your misfortune.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender">Freeman Hunt, <abbr class="name">E. K.</abbr> Collins, Isaac <abbr class="name">Y.</abbr> Fowler, James Phalen, Cornelius Vanderbilt, <abbr class="name">F. B.</abbr> Cuting, James <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Gerard, Simeon Draper, Thomas McElrath, Park Godwin, <abbr class="name">R. F.</abbr> Carman, Gen. <abbr class="name">C. W.</abbr> Sanford, Philo Hurd, President <abbr class="name">H. R.</abbr> R.; Wm. Ellsworth, President Brooklyn Ins. <abbr>Co.</abbr>; George <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Doughty, President Excelsior Ins. <abbr>Co.</abbr>; Chas. <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Cromwell, Robert Stuyvesant, <abbr class="name">E. L.</abbr> Livingston, <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Busteed, Wm. <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Fettridge, <abbr class="name">E. N.</abbr> Haughwout, Geo. <abbr class="name">F.</abbr> Nesbitt, Osborne, Boardman &amp; Townsend, Charles <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Delavan, I &amp; <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Berrien, Fisher &amp; Bird, Solomon &amp; Hart, <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> Young, <abbr class="name">M.</abbr> D., Treadwell, Acker &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas Hotel, John Wheeler, Union Square Hotel, <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Leland &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, Metropolitan Hotel, Albert Clark, Brevoort House, <abbr class="name">H. D.</abbr> Clapp, Everett House, John Taylor, International Hotel, Sydney Hopman, Smithsonian Hotel, <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Delmonico, Delmonico’s, Geo. <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Sherman, Florence’s Hotel, Kingsley &amp; Ainslee, Howard Hotel, Libby &amp; Whitney, Lovejoy’s Hotel, Howard &amp; Brown, Tammany Hall, Jonas Bartlett, Washington Hotel, Patten &amp; Lynde, Pacific Hotel, <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Johnson, Johnson’s Hotel, and over 1,000 others.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>To this gratifying communication I replied as follows:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Long Island, Tuesday, <time datetime="1856-06-03">June 3, 1856</time>.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Gentlemen</span>⁠—I can hardly find words to express my gratitude for your very kind proposition. The popular sympathy is to me far more precious than gold, and that sympathy seems in my case to extend from my immediate neighbors, in Bridgeport, to all parts of our Union.</p>
				<p>Proffers of pecuniary assistance have reached me from every quarter, not only from friends, but from entire strangers. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wm. <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Burton, Miss Laura Keene and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Niblo have in the kindest manner tendered me the receipts of their theatres for one evening. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gough volunteered the proceeds of one of his attractive lectures; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Phalon generously offered me the free use of the Academy of Music; many professional ladies and gentlemen have urged me to accept their gratuitous services. I have, on principle, respectfully declined them all, as I beg, with the most grateful acknowledgments (at least for the present), to decline yours⁠—not because a benefit, in itself, is an objectionable thing, but because I have ever made it a point to ask nothing of the public on personal grounds, and should prefer, while I can possibly avoid that contingency, to accept nothing from it without the honest conviction that I had individually given it in return a full equivalent.</p>
				<p>While favored with health, I feel competent to earn an honest livelihood for myself and family. More than this I shall certainly never attempt with such a load of debt suspended <i xml:lang="la">in terrorem</i> over me. While I earnestly, thank you, therefore, for your generous consideration, gentlemen, I trust you will appreciate my desire to live unhumiliated by a sense of dependence; and believe me, sincerely yours,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">To <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Freeman Hunt, <abbr class="name">E. K.</abbr> Collins, and others.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And with other offers of assistance from far and near, came the following from a little gentleman who did not forget his old friend and benefactor in the time of trial:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Jones’ Hotel, Philadelphia, <time datetime="1856-05-12">May 12, 1856</time>.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum</span>⁠—I understand your friends, and that means “all creation,” intend to get up some benefits for your family. Now, my dear sir, just be good enough to remember that I belong to that mighty crowd, and I must have a finger (or at least a “thumb”) in that pie. I am bound to appear on all such occasions in some shape, from “Jack the Giant Killer,” upstairs, to the doorkeeper down, whichever may serve you best; and there are some feats that I can perform as well as any other man of my inches. I have just started out on my western tour, and have my carriage, ponies and assistants all here, but I am ready to go on to New York, bag and baggage, and remain at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barnum’s service as long as I, in my small way, can be useful. Put me into any “heavy” work, if you like. Perhaps I cannot lift as much as some other folks, but just take your pencil in hand and you will see I can draw a tremendous load. I drew two hundred tons at a single pull today, embracing two thousand persons, whom I hauled up safely and satisfactorily to all parties, at one exhibition. Hoping that you will be able to fix up a lot of magnets that will attract all New York, and volunteering to sit on any part of the loadstone, I am, as ever, your little but sympathizing friend,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender">Gen. Tom Thumb.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Even this generous offer from my little friend I felt compelled to refuse. But kind words were written and spoken which I could not prevent, nor did I desire to do so, and which were worth more to me than money. I should fail to find space, if I wished it, to copy one-tenth part of the cordial and kind articles and paragraphs that appeared about me in newspapers throughout the country. The following sentence from an editorial article in a prominent New York journal was the keynote to many similar kind notices in all parts of the Union: “It is a fact beyond dispute that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum’s financial difficulties have accumulated from the goodness of his nature; kindhearted and generous to a fault, it has ever been his custom to lend a helping hand to the struggling; and honest industry and enterprise have found his friendship prompt and faithful.” The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Boston Journal</i> dwelt especially upon the use I had made of my money in my days of prosperity in assisting deserving laboring men and in giving an impulse to business in the town where I resided. It seems only just that I should make this very brief allusion to these things, if only as an offset to the unbounded abuse of those who believed in kicking me merely because I was down; nor can I refrain from copying the following from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Boston Saturday Evening Gazette</i>, of <time datetime="1856-05-03">May 3, 1856</time>:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p>Barnum Redivivus</p>
					<p>A Word For Barnum</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Barnum, your hand! Though you are “down,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see full many a frigid shoulder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be brave, my brick, and though they frown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prove that misfortune makes you bolder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s many a man that sneers, my hero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And former praise converts to scorning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would worship⁠—when he fears⁠—a Nero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bend “where thrift may follow fawning.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You humbugged us⁠—that we have seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>We got our money’s worth</em>, old fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though you thought our <em>minds</em> were <em>green</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We never thought your <em>heart</em> was <em>yellow</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We knew you liberal, generous, warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quick to assist a falling brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with such virtues, what’s the harm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All memories of your faults to smother?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>We had not heard the peerless Lind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for your spirit enterprising,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You were the man to raise the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make a <i xml:lang="fr">coup</i> confessed surprising.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’re reckoned in your native town</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A friend in need, a friend in danger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You ever keep the latchstring down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greet with open hand the stranger.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stiffen your upper lip. You know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who are your friends and who your foes now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We pay for knowledge as we go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though you get some sturdy blows now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ve a fair field⁠—no favors crave⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The storm once passed will find you braver⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In virtue’s cause long may you wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on the right side, never waver.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Desirous of knowing who was the author of this kindly effusion, I wrote, while preparing this autobiography, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B. P.</abbr> Shillaber, one of the editors of the journal, and well known to the public as “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Partington.” In reply, I received the following letter in which it will be seen that he makes sympathetic allusion to the burning of my last Museum, only a few weeks before the date of his letter:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Chelsea, <time datetime="1868-04-25">April 25, 1868</time>.</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum</span>:⁠—The poem in question was written by <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Wallace Thaxter, associate editor with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clapp and myself, on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gazette</i>⁠—since deceased, a glorious fellow⁠—who wrote the poem from a sincere feeling of admiration for yourself. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clapp, (<abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. W.</abbr> Clapp,) published it with his full approbation. I heard of your new trouble, in my sick chamber, where I have been all winter, with regret, and wish you as ready a release from attending difficulty as your genius has hitherto achieved under like circumstances.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Yours, very truly,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">B. P.</abbr> Shillaber.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>But the manifestations of sympathy which came to me from Bridgeport, where my home had been for more than ten years, were the most gratifying of all, because they showed unmistakably that my best friends, those who were most constant in their friendship and most emphatic in their esteem, were my neighbors and associates who, of all people, knew me best. With such support I could easily endure the attacks of traducers elsewhere. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">New York Times</i>, <time datetime="1856-04-25">April 25, 1856</time>, under the head of “Sympathy for Barnum,” published a full report of the meeting of my fellow-citizens of Bridgeport, the previous evening, to take my case into consideration.</p>
			<p>In response to a call headed by the mayor of the city, and signed by several hundred citizens, this meeting was held in Washington Hall “for the purpose of sympathizing with <abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, in his recent pecuniary embarrassments, and of giving some public expression to their views in reference to his financial misfortunes.” It was the largest public meeting which, up to that time, had ever been held in Bridgeport. Several prominent citizens made addresses, and resolutions were adopted declaring “that respect and sympathy were due to <abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum in return for his many acts of liberality, philanthropy and public spirit,” expressing unshaken confidence in his integrity, admiration for the “fortitude and composure with which he has met reverses into which he has been dragged through no fault of his own except a too generous confidence in pretended friends,” and hoping that he would “yet return to that wealth which he has so nobly employed, and to the community he has so signally benefited.” During the evening the following letter was read:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">New York, Thursday, <time datetime="1856-04-24">April 24, 1856</time>.</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Wm. <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Noble, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>,</p>
				</header>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Sir</span>:⁠—I have just received a slip containing a call for a public meeting of the citizens of Bridgeport to sympathize with me in my troubles. It is headed by His Honor the Mayor, and is signed by most of your prominent citizens, as well as by many men who by hard labor earn their daily bread, and who appreciate a calamity which at a single blow strips a man of his fortune, his dear home, and all the worldly comforts which years of diligent labor had acquired. It is due to truth to say that I knew nothing of this movement until your letter informed me of it.</p>
				<p>In misfortune the true sympathy of neighbors is more consoling and precious than anything which money can purchase. This voluntary offering of my fellow-citizens, though it thrills me with painful emotions and causes tears of gratitude, yet imparts to me renewed strength and fills my heart with thankfulness to Providence for raising up to my sight, above all this wreck, kind hearts which soar above the sordid atmosphere of “dirty dollars.” I can never forget this unexpected kindness from my old friends and neighbors.</p>
				<p>I trust I am not blind to my many faults and shortcomings. I, however, do feel great consolation in believing that I never used money or position to oppress the poor or wrong my fellow-men, and that I never turned empty away those whom I had the power to assist.</p>
				<p>My poor sick wife, who needs the bracing air which our own dear home (made beautiful by her willing hands) would now have afforded her, is driven by the orders of her physician to a secluded spot on Long Island where the sea-wind lends its healthful influence, and where I have also retired for the double purpose of consoling her and of recruiting my own constitution, which, through the excitements of the last few months, has most seriously failed me.</p>
				<p>In our quiet and humble retreat, that which I most sincerely pray for is tranquillity and contentment. I am sure that the remembrance of the kindness of my Bridgeport neighbors will aid me in securing these cherished blessings. No man who has not passed through similar scenes can fully comprehend the misery which has been crowded into the last few months of my life; but I have endeavored to preserve my integrity, and I humbly hope and believe that I am being taught humility and reliance upon Providence, which will yet afford a thousand times more peace and true happiness than can be acquired in the din, strife and turmoil, excitements and struggles of this money-worshipping age. The man who coins his brain and blood into gold, who wastes all of his time and thought upon the almighty dollar, who looks no higher than blocks of houses, and tracts of land, and whose iron chest is crammed with stocks and mortgages tied up with his own heartstrings, may console himself with the idea of safe investments, but he misses a pleasure which I firmly believe this lesson was intended to secure to me, and which it will secure if I can fully bring my mind to realize its wisdom. I think I hear you say⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“When the devil was sick,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The devil a saint would be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But when the devil got well,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The devil a saint was he.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Granted, but, after all, the man who looks upon the loss of money as anything compared to the loss of honor, or health, or self-respect, or friends⁠—a man who can find no source of happiness except in riches⁠—is to be pitied for his blindness. I certainly feel that the loss of money, of home and my home comforts, is dreadful⁠—that to be driven again to find a resting-place away from those I love, and from where I had fondly supposed I was to end my days, and where I had lavished time, money, everything, to make my descent to the grave placid and pleasant⁠—is, indeed, a severe lesson; but, after all, I firmly believe it is for the best, and though my heart may break, I will not repine.</p>
				<p>I regret, beyond expression, that any man should be a loser for having trusted to my name; it would not have been so, if I had not myself been deceived. As it is, I am gratified in knowing that all my individual obligations will be met. It would have been much better if clock creditors had accepted the best offer that it was in my power to make them; but it was not so to be. It is now too late, and as I willingly give up all I possess, I can do no more.</p>
				<p>Wherever my future lot may be cast, I shall ever fondly cherish the kindness which I have always received from the citizens of Bridgeport.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">I am, my dear Sir, truly yours,</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender"><abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Shortly after this sympathetic meeting, a number of gentlemen in Bridgeport offered me a loan of $50,000 if that sum would be instrumental in extricating me from my entanglement. I could not say that this amount would meet the exigency; I could only say, “wait, wait, and hope.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, my eyes were fully opened to the entire magnitude of the deception that had been practised upon my too confiding nature. I not only discovered that my notes had been used to five times the amount I stipulated or expected, but that they had been applied, not to relieving the company from temporary embarrassment after my connection with it, but almost wholly to the redemption of old and rotten claims of years and months gone by. To show the extent to which the fresh victim was deliberately bled, it may be stated that I was induced to become surety to one of the New Haven banks in the sum of $30,000 to indemnify the bank against future losses it might incur from the Jerome company after my connection with it, and by some legerdemain this bond was made to cover past obligations which were older even than my knowledge of the existence of the company. In every way it seemed as if I had been cruelly swindled and deliberately defrauded.</p>
			<p>As the clock company had gone to pieces and was paying but from twelve to fifteen percent for its paper, I sent two of my friends to New Haven to ask for a meeting of the creditors and I instructed them to say in substance for me as follows:</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen: This is a capital practical joke! Before I negotiated with your clock company at all, I was assured by several of you, and particularly by a representative of the bank which was the largest creditor of the concern, that the Jerome company was eminently responsible and that the head of the same was uncommonly pious. On the strength of such representations solely, I was induced to agree to endorse and accept paper for that company to the extent of $110,000⁠—no more. That sum I am now willing to pay for my own verdancy, with an additional sum of $40,000 for your ’cuteness, making a total of $150,000, which you can have if you cry quits with the fleeced showman and let him off.”</p>
			<p>Many of the old creditors favored this proposition; but it was found that the indebtedness was so scattered it would be impracticable to attempt a settlement by an unanimous compromise of the creditors. It was necessary to liquidation that my property should go into the hands of assignees; I therefore at once turned over my Bridgeport property to Connecticut assignees and I removed my family to New York, where I also made an assignment of all my real and personal estate, excepting what had already been transferred in Connecticut.</p>
			<p>About this time I received a letter from Philadelphia proferring $500 in case my circumstances were such that I really stood in need of help. The very wording of the letter awakened the suspicion in my mind that it was a trick to ascertain whether I really had any property, for I knew that banks and brokers in that city held some of my Jerome paper which they refused to compound or compromise. So I at once wrote that I did need $500, and, as I expected, the money did not come, nor was my letter answered; but, as a natural consequence, the Philadelphia bankers who were holding the Jerome paper for a higher percentage at once acceded to the terms which I had announced myself able and willing to pay.</p>
			<p>Every dollar which I honestly owed on my own account I had already paid in full or had satisfactorily arranged. For the liabilities incurred by the deliberate deception which had involved me I offered such a percentage as I thought my estate, when sold, would eventually pay; and my wife, from her own property, advanced from time to time money to take up such notes as could be secured upon these terms. It was, however, a slow process. More than one creditor would hold on to his note, which possibly he had “shaved” at the rate of two or three percent a month, and say:</p>
			<p>“Oh! you can’t keep Barnum down; he will dig out after a while; I shall never sell my claim for less than par and interest.”</p>
			<p>Of course, I knew very well that if all the creditors took this view I should never get out of the entanglement in which I had been involved by the old creditors of the Jerome Company, who had so ingeniously managed to make me take their place. All I could do was to take a thorough survey of the situation, and consider, now that I was down, how I could get up again.</p>
			<p>“Every cloud,” says the proverb, “has a silver lining,” and so I did not despair. “This blow,” I thought “may be beneficial to my children, if not to me.” They had been brought up in luxury; accustomed to call on servants to attend to every want; and almost unlimited in the expenditure of money. My daughter Helen, especially, was naturally extravagant. She was a warmhearted, generous girl, who knew literally nothing of the value of money and the difficulty of acquiring it. At this time she was fifteen years old, and was attending a French boarding school in the City of Washington. A few days after the news of my failure was published in the papers, my friend, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">E. H.</abbr> Chapin, of New York, was at my house. He had long been intimate with my family, and was well acquainted with the extravagant ideas and ways of my daughter Helen. One morning, I received a letter from her, filled with sympathy and sorrow for my misfortunes. She told me how much shocked she was at hearing of my financial disasters, and added: “Do send for me immediately, for I cannot think of remaining here at an expense which my parents cannot afford. I have learned to play the piano well enough to be able to take some little girls as pupils, and in this way I can be of some assistance in supporting the family.”</p>
			<p>On reading this I was deeply affected; and, handing the letter to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Chapin, I said: “There, sir, is a letter which is worth ten thousand dollars.”</p>
			<p>“Twenty thousand, at the least!” was the exclamation of the Doctor when he had read it.</p>
			<p>We were now living in a very frugal manner in a hired furnished house in Eighth Street, near Sixth Avenue, in New York, and our landlady and her family boarded with us. At the age of forty-six, after the acquisition and the loss of a handsome fortune, I was once more nearly at the bottom of the ladder, and was about to begin the world again. The situation was disheartening, but I had energy, experience, health and hope.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
