<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 41: Bennett and the Herald</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Bennett and the Herald</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The American Museum Lease⁠—Its Value⁠—Bennett of the Herald Buys It for $200,000⁠—He Purchases the Property⁠—Overestimate of Its Worth⁠—Max Maretzek⁠—Miss Clara Louise Kellogg’s Estimate of Certain People⁠—The Power Behind the Herald Throne⁠—The Herald’s Influence⁠—Bennett Kicked and Cowhided⁠—His Lawyer Insists Upon My Taking Back the Museum Lease⁠—I Decline⁠—Bennett Refuses My Advertisements⁠—Interview with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson⁠—War of the Managers Upon the Herald⁠—Bennett Humbled⁠—Loss of the Herald’s Prestige⁠—Money⁠—Damage to Bennett’s Establishment⁠—The Editor Sued⁠—Peace Between the Herald and the Managers.</p>
			</header>
			<p>When the old American Museum burned down, and while the ruins were still smoking, I had numerous applications for the purchase of the lease of the two lots, fifty-six by one hundred feet, which had still nearly eleven years to run. It will be remembered that in 1847 I came back from England, while my second lease of five years had yet three years more to run, and renewed that lease for twenty-five years from 1851 at an annual rental of $10,000. It was also stipulated that in case the building was destroyed by fire the proprietor of the property should expend twenty-four thousand dollars towards the erection of a new edifice, and at the end of the term of lease he was to pay me the appraised value of the building, not to exceed $100,000. Rents and real estate values had trebled since I took this twenty-five years’ lease, and hence the remaining term was very valuable. I engaged an experienced and competent real estate broker in Pine Street to examine the terms of my lease, and in view of his knowledge of the cost of erecting buildings and the rentals they were commanding in Broadway, I enjoined him to take his time, and make a careful estimate of what the lease was worth to me, and what price I ought to receive if I sold it to another party. At the end of several days, he showed me his figures, which proved that the lease was fully worth $275,000. As I was inclined to have a museum higher up town, I did not wish to engage in erecting two buildings at once, so I concluded to offer my museum lease for sale. Accordingly, I put it into the hands of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Homer Morgan, with directions to offer it for $225,000, which was $50,000 less than the value at which it had been estimated.</p>
			<p>The next day I met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Gordon Bennett, who told me that he desired to buy my lease, and at the same time to purchase the fee of the museum property, for the erection thereon of a publication building for the New York <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. I said I thought it was very fitting the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> should be the successor of the Museum; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett asked my price.</p>
			<p>“Please to go or send immediately to Homer Morgan’s office,” I replied, “and you will learn that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan has the lease for sale at $225,000. This is $50,000 less than its estimated value; but to you I will deduct $25,000 from my already reduced price, so you may have the lease for $200,000.”</p>
			<p>Bennett replied that he would look into the affair closely; and the next day his attorney sent for my lease. He kept it several days, and then appointed an hour for me to come to his office. I called according to appointment. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett and his attorney had thoroughly examined the lease. It was the property of my wife. Bennett concluded to accept my offer. My wife assigned the lease to him, and his attorney handed me <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett’s check on the Chemical Bank for $200,000. That same day I invested $50,000 in United States bonds; and the remaining $150,000 was similarly invested on the following day. I learned at that time that Bennett had agreed to purchase the fee of the property for $500,000. He had been informed that the property was worth some $350,000 to $400,000, and he did not mind paying $100,000 extra for the purpose of carrying out his plans. But the parties who estimated for him the value of the land knew nothing of the fact that there was a lease upon the property, else of course they would in their estimate have deducted the $200,000 which the lease would cost. When, therefore, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett saw it stated in the newspapers that the sum which he had paid for a piece of land measuring only fifty-six by one hundred feet was more than was ever before paid in any city in the world for a tract of that size, he discovered the serious oversight which he had made; and the owner of the property was immediately informed that Bennett would not take it. But Bennett had already signed a bond to the owner, agreeing to pay $100,000 cash, and to mortgage the premises for the remaining $400,000.</p>
			<p>Supposing that by this step he had shaken off the owner of the fee, Bennett was not long in seeing that, as he was not to own the land, he would have no possible use for the lease, for which he had paid the $200,000; and accordingly his next step was to shake me off also, and get back the money he had paid me.</p>
			<p>At this time Bennett was ruling the managers of the theatres and other amusements with a rod of iron. He had established a large job printing office in connection with the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> office; and woe to the manager who presumed to have his bills printed elsewhere. Any manager who dared to decline employing Bennett’s job office to print his small bills and posters, at Bennett’s exorbitant prices, was ignored in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>; his advertisements were refused, and generally, he and his establishment were blackballed and blackguarded in the columns of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. Of course most of the managers were somewhat sensitive to such attacks, and therefore submitted to his impositions in the job office, his double price for newspaper advertisements, and any other overbearing conditions the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> might choose to dictate. The advertisements of the Academy of Music, then under the direction of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Max Maretzek, had been refused on account of some dissatisfaction in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> office in regard to free boxes, and also because the prima donna, Miss Clara Louise Kellogg, had certain ideas of her own with regard to social intercourse with certain people, as Miss Jenny Lind had with regard to the same people, when she was under my management, and to some degree under my advice, and these ideas were not particularly relished by the power behind the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> throne.</p>
			<p>For my own part, I thoroughly understood Bennett and his concern, and I never cared one farthing for him or his paper. I had seen for years, especially as Bennett’s enormously overestimated “influence” applied to public amusements, that whatever the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> praised, sickened, drooped, and if the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> persisted in praising it, finally died; while whatever the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> attacked prospered, and all the more, the more it was abused. It was utterly impossible for Bennett to injure me, unless he had some more potent weapon than his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. And that this was the general opinion was quite evident from the fact that several years had elapsed since gentlemen were in the almost daily habit of cuffing, kicking and cowhiding Bennett in the streets and other public places for his scurrilous attacks upon them, or upon members of their families. It had come to be seen that what the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> said, good or bad, was, like the editor himself, literally of “no account.”</p>
			<p>My business for many years, as manager of the Museum and other public entertainments, compelled me to court notoriety; and I always found Bennett’s abuse far more remunerative than his praise, even if I could have had the praise at the same price, that is, for nothing. Especially was it profitable to me when I could be the subject of scores of lines of his scolding editorials free of charge, instead of paying him forty cents a line for advertisements, which would not attract a tenth part so much attention. Bennett had tried abusing me, off and on, for twenty years, on one occasion refusing my advertisement altogether for the space of about a year; but I always managed to be the gainer by his course. Now, however, when new difficulties threatened, all the leading managers in New York were members of the “Managers’ Association,” and as we all submitted to the arbitrary and extortionate demands of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>, Bennett thought he had but to crack his whip, in order to keep any and all of us within the traces. The great Ogre of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> supposed he could at all times frighten the little managerial boys into any holes which might be left open for them to hide in. Accordingly, one day Bennett’s attorney wrote me a letter, saying that he would like to have me call on him at his office the following morning. Not dreaming of the object I called as desired, and after a few pleasant commonplace remarks about the weather, and other trifles, the attorney said:</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, I have sent for you to say that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett has concluded not to purchase the museum lots, and therefore that you had better take back the lease, and return the $200,000 paid for it.”</p>
			<p>“Are you in earnest?” I asked with surprise.</p>
			<p>“Certainly, quite so,” he answered.</p>
			<p>“Really,” I said, smiling, “I am sorry I can’t accommodate <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett; I have not got the little sum about me; in fact, I have spent the money.”</p>
			<p>“It will be better for you to take back the lease,” said the attorney seriously.</p>
			<p>“Nonsense,” I replied, “I shall do nothing of the sort, I don’t make child’s bargains. The lease was cheap enough, but I have other business to attend to, and shall have nothing to do with it.”</p>
			<p>The attorney said very little in reply; but I could see, by the almost benignant sorrow expressed upon his countenance, that he evidently pitied me for the temerity that would doubtless lead me into the jaws of the insatiable monster of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. The next morning I observed that the advertisement of my entertainments with my Museum Company at Winter Garden was left out of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> columns. I went directly to the editorial rooms of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>; and learning that Bennett was not in, I said to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson, then managing editor:</p>
			<p>“My advertisement is left out of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>; is there a screw loose?”</p>
			<p>“I believe there is,” was the reply.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“You must ask the Emperor,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson, meaning of course Bennett.</p>
			<p>“When will the ‘Emperor’ be in?” I inquired; “next Monday,” was the answer.</p>
			<p>“Well, I shall not see him,” I replied; “but I wish to have this thing settled at once. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson, I now tender you the money for the insertion of my Museum advertisement on the same terms as are paid by other places of amusement, will you publish it?”</p>
			<p>“I will not,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson peremptorily replied.</p>
			<p>“That is all,” I said. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson then smilingly and blandly remarked, “I have formally answered your formal demand, because I suppose you require it; but you know, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, I can only obey orders.” I assured him that I understood the matter perfectly, and attached no blame to him in the premises. I then proceeded to notify the Secretary of the “Managers’ Association” to call the managers together at twelve o’clock the following day; and there was a full meeting at the appointed time. I stated the facts in the case in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> affair, and simply remarked, that if we did not make common cause against any newspaper publisher who excluded an advertisement from his columns simply to gratify a private pique, it was evident that either and all of us were liable to imposition at any time.</p>
			<p>One of the managers immediately made a motion that the entire association should stop their advertising and bill printing at the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> office, and have no further connection with that establishment. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lester Wallack advised that this motion should not be adopted until a committee had waited upon Bennett, and had reported the result of the interview to the Association. Accordingly, <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Wallack, Wheatley and Stuart were delegated to go down to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> office to call on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett.</p>
			<p>The moment Bennett saw them, he evidently suspected the object of their mission, for he at once commenced to speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wallack in a patronizing manner; told him how long he had known, and how much he respected his late father, who was “a true English gentleman of the old school,” with much more in the same strain. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wallack replied to Bennett that the three managers were appointed a committee to wait upon him to ascertain if he insisted upon excluding from his columns the Museum advertisements⁠—not on account of any objection to the contents of the advertisements, or to the Museum itself, but simply because he had a private business disagreement with the proprietor?⁠—intimating that such a proceeding, for such a reason, and no other, might lead to a rupture of business relations with other managers. In reply, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett had something to say about the fox that had suffered tailwise from a trap, and thereupon advised all other foxes to cut their tails off; and he pointed the fable by setting forth the impolicy of drawing down upon the Association the vengeance of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. The committee, however, coolly insisted upon a direct answer to their question.</p>
			<p>Bennett then answered: “I will not publish Barnum’s advertisement; I do my business as I please, and in my own way.”</p>
			<p>“So do we,” replied one of the managers, and the committee withdrew.</p>
			<p>The next day the Managers’ Association met, heard the report, and unanimously resolved to withdraw their advertisements from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>, and their patronage from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> job establishment, and it was done. Nevertheless, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> for several days continued to print gratuitously the advertisements of Wallack’s Theatre and Niblo’s Garden, and inordinately puffed these establishments, evidently in order to ease the fall, and to convey the idea that some of the theatres patronized the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>, and perhaps hoping by praising these managers to draw them back again, and so to nullify the agreement of the Association in regard to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. Thereupon, the managers headed their advertisements in all the other New York papers with the line, “This Establishment does not advertise in the New York <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>,” and for many months this announcement was kept at the top of every theatrical advertisement and on the posters and playbills.</p>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> then began to abuse and vilify the theatrical and opera managers, their artists and their performances, and by way of contrast profusely praised Tony Pastor’s Bowery show, and Sundry entertainments of a similar character, thereby speedily bringing some of these sideshows to grief and shutting up their shops. Meanwhile, the first-class theatres prospered amazingly under the abuse of Bennett. Their receipts were never larger, and their houses, never more thronged. The public took sides in the matter with the managers and against the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>, and thousands of people went to the theatres merely to show their willingness to support the managers and to spite “Old Bennett.” The editor was fairly caught in his own trap; other journals began to estimate the loss the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> sustained by the action of the managers, and it was generally believed that this loss in advertising and job printing was not less than from $75,000 to $100,000 a year. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>’s circulation also suffered terribly, since hundreds of people, at the hotels and elsewhere, who were accustomed to buy the paper solely for the sake of seeing what amusements were announced for the evening, now bought other papers. This was the hardest blow of all, and it fully accounted for the abuse which the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> daily poured out upon the theatres.</p>
			<p>But the more Bennett raved the more the people laughed, and the more determined did they seem to patronize the managers. Many people came to the Museum, who said they came expressly to show us that the public were with us and against the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. The other managers stated their experience to be the same in this respect. In fact, it was a subject of general remark, that, without exception, the associated managers never had done such a thriving business as during the two years in which they gave the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> the cold shoulder.</p>
			<p>Bennett evidently felt ashamed of the whole transaction; he would never publish the facts in his columns, though he once stated in an editorial that it had been reported that he had been cheated in purchasing the Broadway property; that the case had gone to court, and the public would soon know all the particulars. Some persons supposed by this that Bennett had sued me; but this was far from being the case. The owner of the lots sued Bennett, to compel him to take the title and pay for the property as per agreement; and that was all the “law” there was about it. He held James Gordon Bennett’s bond, that he would pay him half a million of dollars for the land, as follows: $100,000 cash, and a bond and mortgage upon the premises for the remaining $400,000. The day before the suit was to come to trial, Bennett came forward, took the deed, and paid $100,000 cash and gave a bond and mortgage of the entire premises for $400,000. That lien still exists against the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> property.</p>
			<p>Had I really taken back the lease as Bennett desired, he would have been in a worse scrape than ever; for having been compelled to take the property, he would have been obliged, as my landlord, to go on and assist in building a Museum for me according to the terms of my lease, and a Museum I should certainly have built on Bennett’s property, even if I had owned a dozen Museums up town. As it was, Bennett was badly beaten on every side, and especially by the managers, who forever established the fact that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>’s abuse was profitable, and its patronage fatal to any enterprise; and who taught <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennett personally the lesson of his own insignificance, as he had not learned it since the days when gentlemen used to kick and cowhide him up and down the whole length of Nassau Street. In the autumn of 1868, the associated managers came to the conclusion that the punishment of Bennett for two years was sufficient, and they consented to restore their advertisements to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i>. I was then associated with the Van Amburgh Company in my new Museum, and we concluded that the cost of advertising in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Herald</i> was more than it was worth, and so we did not enter into the new arrangement made by the Managers’ Association.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
