<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 21: Jenny Lind</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Jenny Lind</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Arrival at <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis⁠—Surprising Proposition of Miss Lind’s Secretary⁠—How the Manager Managed⁠—Readiness to Cancel the Contract⁠—Consultation with “Uncle Sol.”⁠—Barnum Not to Be Hired⁠—A “Joke”⁠—Temperance Lecture in the Theater⁠—Sol. Smith⁠—A Comedian, Author, and Lawyer⁠—Unique Dedication⁠—Jenny Lind’s Character and Charities⁠—Sharp Words from the West⁠—Selfish Advisers⁠—Miss Lind’s Generous Impulses⁠—Her Simple and Childlike Character⁠—Confessions of a Manager⁠—Private Reputation and Public Renown⁠—Character as a Stock in Trade⁠—le Grand Smith⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dolby⁠—The Angelic Side Kept Outside⁠—My Own Share in the Public Benefits⁠—Justice to Miss Lind and Myself.</p>
			</header>
			<p>According to agreement, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Magnolia</i> waited for us at Natchez and Memphis, and we gave profitable concerts at both places. The concert at Memphis was the sixtieth in the list since Miss Lind’s arrival in America, and the first concert in <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis would be the sixty-first. When we reached that city, on the morning of the day when our first concert was to be given, Miss Lind’s secretary came to me, commissioned, he said, by her, and announced that as sixty concerts had already taken place, she proposed to avail herself of one of the conditions of our contract, and cancel the engagement next morning. As this was the first intimation of the kind I had received, I was somewhat startled, though I assumed an entirely placid demeanor, and asked:</p>
			<p>“Does Miss Lind authorize you to give me this notice?”</p>
			<p>“I so understand it,” was the reply.</p>
			<p>I immediately reflected that if our contract was thus suddenly cancelled, Miss Lind was bound to repay to me all I had paid her over the stipulated $1,000 for each concert, and a little calculation showed that the sum thus to be paid back was $77,000, since she had already received from me $137,000 for sixty concerts. In this view, I could not but think that this was a ruse of some of her advisers, and, possibly, that she might know nothing of the matter. So I told her secretary that I would see him again in an hour, and meanwhile I went to my old friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sol. Smith for his legal and friendly advice.</p>
			<p>I showed him my contract and told him how much I had been annoyed by the selfish and greedy hangers-on and advisers, legal and otherwise, of Jenny Lind. I talked to him about the “wheels within wheels” which moved this great musical enterprise, and asked and gladly accepted his advice, which mainly coincided with my own views of the situation. I then went back to the secretary and quietly told him that I was ready to settle with Miss Lind and to close the engagement.</p>
			<p>“But,” said he, manifestly ‘taken aback,’ “you have already advertised concerts in Louisville and Cincinnati, I believe.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I replied; “but you may take my contracts for halls and printing off my hands at cost.” I further said that he was welcome to the assistance of my agent who had made these arrangements, and, moreover, that I would cheerfully give my own services to help them through with these concerts, thus giving them a good start ‘on their own hook.’</p>
			<p>My liberality, which he acknowledged, emboldened him to make an extraordinary proposition:</p>
			<p>“Now suppose,” he asked, “Miss Lind should wish to give some fifty concerts in this country, what would you charge as manager, per concert?”</p>
			<p>“A million dollars each, not one cent less,” I replied. I was now thoroughly aroused; the whole thing was as clear as daylight, and I continued:</p>
			<p>“Now we might as well understand each other; I don’t believe Miss Lind has authorized you to propose to me to cancel our contract; but if she has, just bring me a line to that effect over her signature and her check for the amount due me by the terms of that contract, some $77,000, and we will close our business connections at once.”</p>
			<p>“But why not make a new arrangement,” persisted the Secretary, “for fifty concerts more, by which Miss Lind shall pay you liberally, say $1,000 per concert?”</p>
			<p>“Simply because I hired Miss Lind, and not she me,” I replied, “and because I never ought to take a farthing less for my risk and trouble than the contract gives me. I have voluntarily paid Miss Lind more than twice as much as I originally contracted to pay her, or as she expected to receive when she first engaged with me. Now, if she is not satisfied, I wish to settle instantly and finally. If you do not bring me her decision today, I shall go to her for it tomorrow morning.”</p>
			<p>I met the secretary soon after breakfast next morning and asked him if he had a written communication for me from Miss Lind? He said he had not and that the whole thing was a “joke.” He merely wanted, he added, to see what I would say to the proposition. I asked him if Miss Lind was in the “joke,” as he called it? He hoped I would not inquire, but would let the matter drop. I went on, as usual, and gave four more concerts in <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, and followed out my programme as arranged in other cities for many weeks following; nor at that time, nor at any time afterwards, did Miss Lind give me the slightest intimation that she had any knowledge of the proposition of her secretary to cancel our agreement or to employ me as her manager.</p>
			<p>During our stay at <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, I delivered a temperance lecture in the theater, and at the close, among other signers, of the pledge, was my friend and adviser, <abbr class="name">Sol.</abbr> Smith. “Uncle Sol,” as everyone called him, was a famous character in his time. He was an excellent comedian, an author, a manager and a lawyer. For a considerable period of his life, he was largely concerned in theatricals in <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, New Orleans and other cities, and acquired a handsome property. He died at a ripe old age, in <time datetime="1869">1869</time>, respected and lamented by all who knew him. I esteem it an honor to have been one of his intimate friends.</p>
			<p>A year or two before he died, he published a very interesting volume, giving a full account of the leading incidents in his long and varied career as an actor and manager. He had previously, in <time datetime="1854">1854</time>, published an autobiographical work, comprising an account of the “second seven years of his professional life,” together with sketches of adventure in after years, and entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Theatrical Journey-Work and Anecdotical Recollections of <abbr class="name">Sol.</abbr> Smith, Comedian, Attorney at Law</i>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> This unique work was preceded by a dedication which I venture to copy. It was as follows:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">“To Phineas <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Barnum, Proprietor of the American Museum, <abbr class="eoc">Etc.</abbr></p>
				</header>
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Great Impressario</span>: Whilst you were engaged in your grand Jenny Lind speculation, the following conundrum went the rounds of the American newspapers:</p>
				<p>“ ‘Why is it that Jenny Lind and Barnum will never fall out?’ Answer: ‘Because he is always forgetting, and she is always forgiving.’</p>
				<p>“I have never asked you the question directly, whether you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, started that conundrum, or not; but I strongly suspect that you did. At all events, I noticed that your whole policy was concentrated into one idea⁠—to make an angel of Jenny, and depreciate yourself in contrast.</p>
				<p>“You may remember that in this city (<abbr>St.</abbr> Louis), I acted in one instance as your ‘legal adviser,’ and as such, necessarily became acquainted with all the particulars of your contract with the so-called Swedish Nightingale, as well as the various modifications claimed by that charitable lady, and submitted to by you after her arrival in this country; which modifications (I suppose it need no longer be a secret) secured to her⁠—besides the original stipulation of one thousand dollars for every concert, attendants, carriages, assistant artists, and a pompous and extravagant retinue, fit (only) for a European princess⁠—one half of the profits of each performance. You may also remember the legal advice I gave you on the occasion referred to, and the salutary effect of your following it. You must remember the extravagant joy you felt afterwards, in Philadelphia, when the ‘Angel’ made up her mind to avail herself of one of the stipulations in her contract, to break off at the end of a hundred nights, and even bought out seven of that hundred⁠—supposing that she could go on without your aid as well as with it. And you cannot but remember, how, like a rocket-stick she dropped, when your business connection with her ended, and how she ‘fizzed out’ the remainder of her concert nights in this part of the world, and soon afterwards retired to her domestic blissitude in Sweden.</p>
				<p>“You know, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, if you would only tell, which of the two it was that was ‘forgetting,’ and which ‘forgiving’; and you also know who actually gave the larger portion of those sums which you heralded to the world as the sole gifts of the ‘divine Jenny.’</p>
				<p>“Of all your speculations⁠—from the negro centenarina, who didn’t nurse General Washington, down to the Bearded Woman of Genoa⁠—there was not one which required the exercise of so much humbuggery as the Jenny Lind concerts; and I verily believe there is no man living, other than yourself, who could, or would, have risked the enormous expenditure of money necessary to carry them through successfully⁠—travelling, with sixty artists, four thousand miles, and giving ninety-three concerts, at an actual cost of forty-five hundred dollars each, is what no other man would have undertaken⁠—you accomplished this, and pocketed by the operation but little less than two hundred thousand dollars! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, you are yourself, alone!</p>
				<p>“I honor you, oh! Great Impressario, as the most successful manager in America or any other country. Democrat, as you are, you can give a practical lesson to the aristocrats of Europe how to live. At your beautiful and tasteful residence, Iranistan (I don’t like the name, though,) you can and do entertain your friends with a warmth of hospitality, only equalled by that of the great landed proprietors of the old country, or of our own sunny South. Whilst riches are pouring into your coffers from your various ventures in all parts of the world, you do not hoard your immense means, but continually ‘cast them forth upon the waters,’ rewarding labor, encouraging the arts, and lending a helping hand to industry in all its branches. Not content with doing all this, you deal telling blows, whenever opportunity offers, upon the monster Intemperance. Your labors in this great cause alone, should entitle you to the thanks of all good men, women and children in the land. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, you deserve all your good fortune, and I hope you may long live to enjoy your wealth and honor.</p>
				<p>“As a small instalment towards the debt, I, as one of the community, owe you, and with the hope of affording you an hour’s amusement (if you can spare that amount of time from your numerous avocations to read it), I present you with this little volume, containing a very brief account of some of my journey-work in the south and west; and remain, very respectfully,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your friend, and affectionate uncle,</p>
					<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">“Sol. Smith.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">“Chouteau Avenue, <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, “<abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1, 1854.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Uncle” <abbr class="name">Sol.</abbr> Smith must be held solely responsible for his extravagant estimate of <abbr class="name">P. T.</abbr> Barnum, and for his somewhat deprecatory view of the attributes of the “divine Jenny.” It is true that he derived many of his impressions of Miss Lind from the annoying circumstances that compelled me to seek his professional advice and assistance in <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, when Jenny Lind’s secretary came to me with an assumed authorization from her to abruptly close our engagement. But when <abbr class="name">Sol.</abbr> Smith’s dedication was first published, there were plenty of people and papers throughout the land that were eager to catch up and endorse this new view of Miss Lind’s character. The Athenians were sometimes sick, no doubt, of hearing Aristides always called “the Just.” Yet, some of the sharp things which <abbr class="name">Sol.</abbr> Smith means to say about Miss Lind, apply rather to the selfish persons who, unfortunately, were more in her confidence than I ever aspired to be, and who assumed to advise her and thus easily perverted her better judgment.</p>
			<p>With all her excellent and even extraordinarily good qualities, however, Jenny Lind was human, though the reputation she bore in Europe for her many charitable acts led me to believe, till I knew her, that she was nearly perfect. I think now that her natural impulses were more simple, childlike, pure and generous than those of almost any other person I ever met. But she had been petted, almost worshipped, so long, that it would have been strange indeed if her unbounded popularity had not in some degree affected her to her hurt, and it must not be thought extraordinary if she now and then exhibited some phase of human weakness.</p>
			<p>Like most persons of uncommon talent, she had a strong will which, at times, she found ungovernable; but if she was ever betrayed into a display of ill-temper she was sure to apologize and express her regret afterwards. Le Grand Smith, who was quite intimate with her, and who was my right-hand man during the entire Lind engagement, used sometimes to say to me:</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, you have managed wonderfully in always keeping Jenny’s ‘angel’ side outside with the public.”</p>
			<p>More than one Englishman⁠—I may instance <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dolby, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dickens’s agent during his last visit to America⁠—expressed surprise at the confirmed impression of “perfection” entertained by the general American public in regard to the Swedish Nightingale. These things are written with none but the kindest feelings towards the sweet songstress, and only to modify the too current ideas of superhuman excellence which cannot be characteristic of any mortal being.</p>
			<p>As I have before intimated in giving details of my management of the enterprise, believing, as I did when I engaged her, in her “angelic” reputation, I am frank enough to confess that I considered her private character a valuable adjunct, even in a business point of view, to her renown as a singer. I admit that I took her charities into account as part of my “stock in trade.” Whenever she sang for a public or private charity, she gave her voice, which was worth a thousand dollars to her every evening. At such times, I always insisted upon paying for the hall, orchestra, printing, and other expenses, because I felt able and willing to contribute my full share towards the worthy objects which prompted these benefits.</p>
			<p>This narration would be incomplete if I did not add the following:</p>
			<p>We were in Havana when I showed to Miss Lind a paper containing the conundrum on “forgetting” and “forgiving,” at which she laughed heartily, but immediately checked herself and said:</p>
			<p>“O! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, this is not fair; you know that you really give more than I do from the proceeds of every one of these charity concerts.”</p>
			<p>And it is but just to her to say that she frequently remonstrated with me and declared that the actual expenses should be deducted and the thus lessened sum devoted to the charity for which the concert might be given; but I always laughingly told her that I must do my part, give my share, and that if it was purely a business operation, “bread cast upon the waters,” it would return, perhaps, buttered; for the larger her reputation for liberality, the more liberal the public would surely be to us and to our enterprise.</p>
			<p>I have no wish to conceal these facts; and I certainly have no desire to receive a larger meed of praise than my qualified generosity merits. Justice to myself and to my management, as well as to Miss Lind, seems to permit, if not to demand, this explanation.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
