<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII: The Nightingale in New York</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Nightingale in New York</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Final Concerts in Liverpool⁠—Departure for America⁠—Arrival Off Staten Island⁠—My First Interview with Jenny Lind⁠—The Tremendous Throng at the Wharf⁠—Triumphal Arches⁠—“Welcome to America”⁠—Excitement in the City⁠—Serenade at the Irving House⁠—The Prize Ode⁠—Bayard Taylor the Prizeman⁠—“Barnum’s Parnassus”⁠—“Barnumopsis”⁠—First Concert in Castle Garden⁠—A New Agreement⁠—Reception of Jenny Lind⁠—Unbounded Enthusiasm⁠—Barnum Called Out⁠—Julius Benedict⁠—The Success of the Enterprise Established⁠—Two Grand Charity Concerts in New York⁠—Date of the First Regular Concert.</p>
			</header>
			<p>After the engagement with Miss Lind was consummated, she declined several liberal offers to sing in London, but, at my solicitation, gave two concerts in Liverpool, on the eve of her departure for America. My object in making this request was, to add the <i xml:lang="fr">éclat</i> of that side to the excitement on this side of the Atlantic, which was already nearly up to fever heat.</p>
			<p>The first of the two Liverpool concerts was given the night previous to the departure of the Saturday steamer for America. My agent had procured the services of a musical critic from London, who finished his account of this concert at half past one o’clock the following morning, and at two o’clock my agent was overseeing its insertion in a Liverpool morning paper, numbers of which he forwarded to me by the steamer of the same day. The republication of the criticism in the American papers, including an account of the enthusiasm which attended and followed this concert⁠—her transatlantic⁠—had the desired effect.</p>
			<p>On Wednesday morning, <time datetime="1850-08-21">August 21, 1850</time>, Jenny Lind and <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Benedict and Belletti, set sail from Liverpool in the steamship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Atlantic</i>, in which I had long before engaged the necessary accommodations, and on board of which I had shipped a piano for their use. They were accompanied by my agent, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilton, and also by Miss Ahmansen and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Max Hjortzberg, cousins of Miss Lind, the latter being her Secretary; also by her two servants, and the valet of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Benedict and Belletti.</p>
			<p>It was expected that the steamer would arrive on Sunday, <time datetime="1850-09-01">September 1</time>, but, determined to meet the songstress on her arrival whenever it might be, I went to Staten Island on Saturday, and slept at the hospitable residence of my friend, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Sidney Doane, who was at that time the Health Officer of the Port of New York. A few minutes before twelve o’clock, on Sunday morning, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Atlantic</i> hove in sight, and immediately afterwards, through the kindness of my friend Doane, I was on board the ship, and had taken Jenny Lind by the hand.</p>
			<p>After a few moments’ conversation, she asked me when and where I had heard her sing.</p>
			<p>“I never had the pleasure of seeing you before in my life,” I replied.</p>
			<p>“How is it possible that you dared risk so much money on a person whom you never heard sing?” she asked in surprise.</p>
			<p>“I risked it on your reputation, which in musical matters I would much rather trust than my own judgment,” I replied.</p>
			<p>I may as well state, that although I relied prominently upon Jenny Lind’s reputation as a great musical artiste, I also took largely into my estimate of her success with all classes of the American public, her character for extraordinary benevolence and generosity. Without this peculiarity in her disposition, I never would have dared make the engagement which I did, as I felt sure that there were multitudes of individuals in America who would be prompted to attend her concerts by this feeling alone.</p>
			<p>Thousands of persons covered the shipping and piers, and other thousands had congregated on the wharf at Canal Street, to see her. The wildest enthusiasm prevailed as the steamer approached the dock. So great was the rush on a sloop near the steamer’s berth, that one man, in his zeal to obtain a good view, accidentally tumbled overboard, amid the shouts of those near him. Miss Lind witnessed this incident, and was much alarmed. He was, however, soon rescued, after taking to himself a cold duck instead of securing a view of the Nightingale. A bower of green trees, decorated with beautiful flags, was discovered on the wharf, together with two triumphal arches, on one of which was inscribed, “Welcome, Jenny Lind!” The second was surmounted by the American eagle, and bore the inscription, “Welcome to America!” These decorations were not produced by magic, and I do not know that I can reasonably find fault with those who suspected I had a hand in their erection. My private carriage was in waiting, and Jenny Lind was escorted to it by Captain West. The rest of the musical party entered the carriage, and mounting the box at the driver’s side, I directed him to the Irving House. I took that seat as a legitimate advertisement, and my presence on the outside of the carriage aided those who filled the windows and sidewalks along the whole route, in coming to the conclusion that Jenny Lind had arrived.</p>
			<p>A reference to the journals of that day will show, that never before had there been such enthusiasm in the City of New York, or indeed in America. Within ten minutes after our arrival at the Irving House, not less than twenty thousand persons had congregated around the entrance in Broadway, nor was the number diminished before nine o’clock in the evening. At her request, I dined with her that afternoon, and when, according to European custom, she prepared to pledge me in a glass of wine, she was somewhat surprised at my saying, “Miss Lind, I do not think you can ask any other favor on earth which I would not gladly grant; but I am a teetotaler, and must beg to be permitted to drink your health and happiness in a glass of cold water.”</p>
			<p>At twelve o’clock that night, she was serenaded by the New York Musical Fund Society, numbering, on that occasion, two hundred musicians. They were escorted to the Irving House by about three hundred firemen, in their red shirts, bearing torches. There was a far greater throng in the streets than there was even during the day. The calls for Jenny Lind were so vehement that I led her through a window to the balcony. The loud cheers from the crowds lasted for several minutes, before the serenade was permitted to proceed again.</p>
			<p>I have given the merest sketch of but a portion of the incidents of Jenny Lind’s first day in America. For weeks afterwards the excitement was unabated. Her rooms were thronged by visitors, including the magnates of the land in both Church and State. The carriages of the wealthiest citizens could be seen in front of her hotel at nearly all hours of the day, and it was with some difficulty that I prevented the “fashionables” from monopolizing her altogether, and thus, as I believed, sadly marring my interests by cutting her off from the warm sympathies she had awakened among the masses. Presents of all sorts were showered upon her. Milliners, mantua-makers, and shopkeepers vied with each other in calling her attention to their wares, of which they sent her many valuable specimens, delighted if, in return, they could receive her autograph acknowledgment. Songs, quadrilles and polkas were dedicated to her, and poets sung in her praise. We had Jenny Lind gloves, Jenny Lind bonnets, Jenny Lind riding hats, Jenny Lind shawls, mantillas, robes, chairs, sofas, pianos⁠—in fact, everything was Jenny Lind. Her movements were constantly watched, and the moment her carriage appeared at the door, it was surrounded by multitudes, eager to catch a glimpse of the Swedish Nightingale.</p>
			<p>In looking over my “scrapbooks” of extracts from the New York papers of that day, in which all accessible details concerning her were duly chronicled, it seems almost incredible that such a degree of enthusiasm should have existed. An abstract of the “sayings and doings” in regard to the Jenny Lind mania for the first ten days after her arrival, appeared in the London <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> of <time datetime="1850-09-23"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 23, 1850</time>, and although it was an ironical “showing up” of the American enthusiasm, filling several columns, it was nevertheless a faithful condensation of facts which at this late day seem even to myself more like a dream than reality.</p>
			<p>Before her arrival I had offered $200 for a prize ode, “Greeting to America,” to be sung by Jenny Lind at her first concert. Several hundred “poems” were sent in from all parts of the United States and the Canadas. The duties of the Prize Committee, in reading these effusions and making choice of the one most worthy the prize, were truly arduous. The “offerings,” with perhaps a dozen exceptions, were the merest doggerel trash. The prize was awarded to Bayard Taylor for the following ode:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p>Greeting to America</p>
					<p>Words by Bayard Taylor⁠—music by Julius Benedict.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I greet with a full heart the Land of the West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose Banner of Stars o’er a world is unrolled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose empire o’ershadows Atlantic’s wide breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And opens to sunset its gateway of gold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The land of the mountain, the land of the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rivers that roll in magnificent tide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the souls of the mighty from slumber awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hallow the soil for whose freedom they died!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou Cradle of Empire! though wide be the foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That severs the land of my fathers and thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hear, from thy bosom, the welcome of home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Song has a home in the hearts of the Free!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long as thy waters shall gleam in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long as thy heroes remember their scars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be the hands of thy children united as one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Peace shed her light on thy Banner of Stars!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>This award, although it gave general satisfaction, yet was met with disfavor by several disappointed poets, who, notwithstanding the decision of the committee, persisted in believing and declaring their own productions to be the best. This state of feeling was doubtless, in part, the cause which led to the publication, about this time, of a witty pamphlet entitled “Barnum’s Parnassus; being Confidential Disclosures of the Prize Committee on the Jenny Lind song.”</p>
			<p>It gave some capital hits in which the committee, the enthusiastic public, the Nightingale, and myself, were roundly ridiculed. The following is a fair specimen from the work in question:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p>Barnumopsis</p>
					<p>A Recitative</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When to the common rest that crowns his days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dusty and worn the tired pedestrian goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What light is that whose wide o’erlooking blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sudden glory on his pathway throws?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis not the setting sun, whose drooping lid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Closed on the weary world at half-past six;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not the rising moon, whose rays are hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Behind the city’s sombre piles of bricks.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It is the Drummond Light, that from the top</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Barnum’s massive pile, sky-mingling there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Darts its quick gleam o’er every shadowed shop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gilds Broadway with unaccustomed glare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There o’er the sordid gloom, whose deep’ning tracks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Furrow the city’s brow, the front of ages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy loftier light descends on cabs and hacks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And on two dozen different lines of stages!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O twilight Sun, with thy far darting ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art a type of him whose tireless hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hung thee on high to guide the stranger’s way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where, in its pride, his vast Museum stands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Him, who in search of wonders new and strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grasps the wide skirts of Nature’s mystic robe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Explores the circles of eternal change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the dark chambers of the central globe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He, from the reedy shores of fabled Nile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has brought, thick-ribbed and ancient as old iron,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That venerable beast the crocodile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many a skin of many a famous lion.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go lose thyself in those continuous halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where strays the fond papa with son and daughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that charms or startles or appals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou shalt behold, and for a single quarter!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far from the Barcan deserts now withdrawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There huge constrictors coil their scaly backs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, cased in glass, malignant and unshorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old murderers glare in sullenness and wax.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There many a varied form the sight beguiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In rusty broadcloth decked and shocking hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there the unwieldy Lambert sits and smiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the majestic plenitude of fat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Or for thy gayer hours, the orangutan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or ape salutes thee with his strange grimace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their shapes, stuffed as on earth they sprang,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thine individual being thou canst trace!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And joys the youth in life’s green spring, who goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the sweet babe and the gray-headed nurse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see those Cosmoramic orbs disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The varied beauties of the universe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And last, not least, the marvellous Ethiope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Changing his skin by preternatural skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom every setting sun’s diurnal slope</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaves whiter than the last, and whitening still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All that of monstrous, scaly, strange and queer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has come from out the womb of earliest time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast, O Barnum, in thy keeping here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor is this all⁠—for triumphs more sublime</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Await thee yet! I, Jenny Lind, who reigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sublimely throned, the imperial queen of song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wooed by thy golden harmonies, have deigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Captive to join the heterogeneous throng.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sustained by an unfaltering trust in coin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dealt from thy hand, O thou illustrious man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladly I heard the summons come to join</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself the innumerable caravan.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Besides the foregoing, this pamphlet contained eleven poems, most of which abounded in wit. I have room for but a single stanza. The poet speaks of the various curiosities in the Museum, and representing me as still searching for further novelties, makes me address the Swedish Nightingale as follows:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“So Jenny, come along! you’re just the card for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And quit these kings and queens, for the country of the free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They’ll welcome you with speeches, and serenades, and rockets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you will touch their hearts, and I will tap their pockets;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if between us both the public isn’t skinned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why, my name isn’t Barnum, nor your name Jenny Lind!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Various extracts from this brochure were copied in the papers daily, and my agents scattered the work as widely as possible, thus efficiently aiding and advertising my enterprise and serving to keep up the public excitement.</p>
			<p>Among the many complimentary poems sent in, was the following, by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. H.</abbr> Sigourney, which that distinguished writer enclosed in a letter to me, with the request that I should hand it to Miss Lind:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<header>
					<p>The Swedish Songstress and Her Charities</p>
					<p>By <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. H.</abbr> Sigourney.</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Blest must their vocation be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, with tones of melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charm the discord and the strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the railroad rush of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with Orphean magic move</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls inert to life and love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there’s one who doth inherit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angel gift and angel spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bidding tides of gladness flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the realms of want and woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Mid lone age and misery’s lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindling pleasures long forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking minds oppressed with night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on darkness shedding light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She the seraph’s speech doth know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hath done their deeds below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, when o’er this misty strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shall clasp their waiting hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will fold her to their breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More a sister than a guest.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Jenny Lind’s first concert was fixed to come off at Castle Garden, on Wednesday evening, <time datetime="1850-09-11">September 11th</time>, and most of the tickets were sold at auction on the Saturday and Monday previous to the concert. John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Genin, the hatter, laid the foundation of his fortune by purchasing the first ticket at $225. It has been extensively reported that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Genin and I are brothers-in-law, but our only relations are those of business and friendship. The proprietors of the Garden saw fit to make the usual charge of one shilling to all persons who entered the premises, yet three thousand people were present at the auction. One thousand tickets were sold on the first day for an aggregate sum of $10,141.</p>
			<p>On the Tuesday after her arrival I informed Miss Lind that I wished to make a slight alteration in our agreement. “What is it?” she asked in surprise.</p>
			<p>“I am convinced,” I replied, “that our enterprise will be much more successful than either of us anticipated. I wish, therefore, to stipulate that you shall receive not only $1,000 for each concert, besides all the expenses, as heretofore agreed on, but after taking $5,500 per night for expenses and my services, the balance shall be equally divided between us.”</p>
			<p>Jenny looked at me with astonishment. She could not comprehend my proposition. After I had repeated it, and she fully understood its import, she cordially grasped me by the hand, and exclaimed, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum, you are a gentleman of honor: you are generous; it is just as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bates told me; I will sing for you as long as you please; I will sing for you in America⁠—in Europe⁠—anywhere!”</p>
			<p>Upon drawing the new contract which was to include this entirely voluntary and liberal advance on my part, beyond the terms of the original agreement, Miss Lind’s lawyer, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Jay, who was present solely to put in writing the new arrangement between Miss Lind and myself, insisted upon intruding the suggestion that she should have the right to terminate the engagement at the end of the sixtieth concert, if she should choose to do so. This proposition was so persistently and annoyingly pressed that Miss Lind was finally induced to entertain it, at the same time offering, if she did so, to refund to me all moneys paid her up to that time, excepting the $1,000 per concert according to the original agreement. This was agreed to, and it was also arranged that she might terminate the engagement at the one-hundredth concert, if she desired, upon paying me $25,000 for the loss of the additional fifty nights.</p>
			<p>After this new arrangement was completed, I said: “Now, Miss Lind, as you are directly interested, you must have an agent to assist in taking and counting the tickets”; to which she replied, “Oh, no! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum; I have every confidence in you and I must decline to act upon your suggestion”; but I continued:</p>
			<p>“I never allow myself, if it can be avoided, when I have associates in the same interests, to be placed in a position where I must assume the sole responsibility. I never even permitted an actor to take a benefit at my Museum, unless he placed a ticket-taker of his own at the door.”</p>
			<p>Thus urged, Miss Lind engaged <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seton to act as her ticket-taker, and after we had satisfactorily arranged the matter, Jay, knowing the whole affair, had the impudence to come to me with a package of blank printed affidavits, which he demanded that I should fill out, from day to day, with the receipts of each concert, and swear to their correctness before a magistrate!</p>
			<p>I told him that I would see him on the subject at Miss Lind’s hotel that afternoon, and going there a few moments before the appointed hour, I narrated the circumstances to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Benedict and showed him an affidavit which I had made that morning to the effect that I would never directly or indirectly take any advantage whatever of Miss Lind. This I had made oath to, for I thought if there was any swearing of that kind to be done I would do it “in a lump” rather than in detail. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Benedict was very much opposed to it, and arriving during the interview, Jay was made to see the matter in such a light that he was thoroughly ashamed of his proposition, and, requesting that the affair might not be mentioned to Miss Lind, he begged me to destroy the affidavit. I heard no more about swearing to our receipts.</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, <time datetime="1850-09-10">September 10th</time>, I informed Miss Lind that, judging by present appearances, her portion of the proceeds of the first concert would amount to $10,000. She immediately resolved to devote every dollar of it to charity; and, sending for Mayor Woodhull, she acted under his and my advice in selecting the various institutions among which she wished the amount to be distributed.</p>
			<p>My arrangements of the concert room were very complete. The great <i xml:lang="fr">parterre</i> and gallery of Castle Garden were divided by imaginary lines into four compartments, each of which was designated by a lamp of a different color. The tickets were printed in colors corresponding with the location which the holders were to occupy, and one hundred ushers, with rosettes and bearing wands tipped with ribbons of the several hues, enabled every individual to find his or her seat without the slightest difficulty. Every seat was of course numbered in color to correspond with the check, which each person retained after giving up an entrance ticket at the door. Thus, tickets, checks, lamps, rosettes, wands, and even the seat numbers were all in the appropriate colors to designate the different departments. These arrangements were duly advertised, and every particular was also printed upon each ticket. In order to prevent confusion, the doors were opened at five o’clock, while the concert did not commence until eight. The consequence was, that although about five thousand persons were present at the first concert, their entrance was marked with as much order and quiet as was ever witnessed in the assembling of a congregation at church. These precautions were observed at all the concerts given throughout the country under my administration, and the good order which always prevailed was the subject of numberless encomiums from the public and the press.</p>
			<p>The reception of Jenny Lind on her first appearance, in point of enthusiasm, was probably never before equalled in the world. As <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Benedict led her towards the footlights, the entire audience rose to their feet and welcomed her with three cheers, accompanied by the waving of thousands of hats and handkerchiefs. This was by far the largest audience to which Jenny Lind had ever sung. She was evidently much agitated, but the orchestra commenced, and before she had sung a dozen notes of “Casta Diva,” she began to recover her self-possession, and long before the <i xml:lang="it">scena</i> was concluded, she was as calm as if she was in her own drawing-room. Towards the last portion of the <i xml:lang="it">cavatina</i>, the audience were so completely carried away by their feelings, that the remainder of the air was drowned in a perfect tempest of acclamation. Enthusiasm had been wrought to its highest pitch, but the musical powers of Jenny Lind exceeded all the brilliant anticipations which had been formed, and her triumph was complete. At the conclusion of the concert Jenny Lind was loudly called for, and was obliged to appear three times before the audience could be satisfied. They then called vociferously for “Barnum,” and I reluctantly responded to their demand.</p>
			<p>On this first night, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Julius Benedict firmly established with the American people his European reputation, as a most accomplished conductor and musical composer; while Signor Belletti inspired an admiration which grew warmer and deeper in the minds of the American people, to the end of his career in this country.</p>
			<p>It would seem as if the Jenny Lind mania had reached its culminating point before she appeared, and I confess that I feared the anticipations of the public were too high to be realized, and hence that there would be a reaction after the first concert; but I was happily disappointed. The transcendent musical genius of the Swedish Nightingale was superior to all that fancy could paint, and the furor did not attain its highest point until she had been heard. The people were in ecstasies; the powers of editorial acumen, types and ink, were inadequate to sound her praises. The Rubicon was passed. The successful issue of the Jenny Lind enterprise was established. I think there were a hundred men in New York, the day after her first concert, who would have willingly paid me $200,000 for my contract. I received repeated offers for an eighth, a tenth, or a sixteenth, equivalent to that price. But mine had been the risk, and I was determined mine should be the triumph. So elated was I with my success, in spite of all obstacles and false prophets, that I do not think half a million of dollars would have tempted me to relinquish the enterprise.</p>
			<p>Upon settling the receipts of the first concert, they were found to be somewhat less than I anticipated. The sums bid at the auction sales, together with the tickets purchased at private sale, amounted to more than $20,000. It proved, however, that several of the tickets bid off at from $12 to $25 each, were not called for. In some instances, probably the zeal of the bidders cooled down when they came out from the scene of excitement, and once more breathed the fresh sea-breeze which came sweeping up from “the Narrows,” while perhaps, in other instances, bids were made by parties who never intended to take the tickets. I can only say, once for all, that I was never privy to a false bid, and was so particular upon that point, that I would not permit one of my employees to bid on, or purchase a ticket at auction, though requested to do so for especial friends.</p>
			<p>The amount of money received for tickets to the first concert was $17,864.05. As this made Miss Lind’s portion too small to realize the $10,000 which had been announced as devoted to charity, I proposed to divide equally with her the proceeds of the first two concerts, and not count them at all in our regular engagement. Accordingly, the second concert was given <time datetime="1850-09-13">September 13th</time>, and the receipts, amounting to $14,203.03, were, like those of the first concert, equally divided. Our third concert, but which, as between ourselves, we called the “first regular concert,” was given Tuesday <time datetime="1850-09-17">September 17, 1850</time>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
