<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII: At the Foot of the Ladder</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">At the Foot of the Ladder</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Disgust at the Travelling Business⁠—Advertising for an Associate⁠—Rush of the Million-Makers⁠—Counterfeiters, Cheats and Quacks⁠—A New Business⁠—Swindled by My Partner⁠—Diamond the Dancer⁠—A New Company⁠—Desertions⁠—Successes at New Orleans⁠—Tyrone Power and Fanny Ellsler⁠—In Jail Again⁠—Back to New York⁠—Acting as a Book Agent⁠—Leasing Vauxhall⁠—from Hand to Mouth⁠—Determination to Make Money⁠—Fortune Opening Her Door⁠—The American Museum for Sale⁠—Negotiations for the Purchase⁠—Hopes and Disappointments⁠—The Train Laid⁠—Smashing a Rival Company.</p>
			</header>
			<p>I have said that the show business has as many grades of dignity as trade, which ranges all the way from the mammoth wholesale establishment down to the corner stand. The itinerant amusement business is at the bottom of the ladder. I had begun there, but I had no wish to stay there; in fact, I was thoroughly disgusted with the trade of a travelling showman, and although I felt that I could succeed in that line, yet I always regarded it, not as an end, but as a means to something better.</p>
			<p>Longing now for some permanent respectable business, I advertised for a partner, stating that I had $2,500 to invest and would add my unremitting personal attention to the capital and the business. This advertisement gave me an altogether new insight into human nature. Whoever wishes to know how some people live, or want to live, let him advertise for a partner, at the same time stating that he has a large or small capital to invest. I was flooded with answers to my advertisements and received no less than ninety-three different propositions for the use of my capital. Of these, at least one-third were from porterhouse keepers. Brokers, pawnbrokers, lottery-policy dealers, patent medicine men, inventors, and others also made application. Some of my correspondents declined to specifically state the nature of their business, but they promised to open the door to untold wealth.</p>
			<p>I had interviews with some of these mysterious million-makers. One of them was a counterfeiter, who, after much hesitation and pledges of secrecy showed me some counterfeit coin and bank notes; he wanted $2,500 to purchase paper and ink and to prepare new dies, and he actually proposed that I should join him in the business which promised, he declared, a safe and rich harvest. Another sedate individual, dressed in Quaker costume, wanted me to join him in an oat speculation. By buying a horse and wagon and by selling oats, bought at wholesale, in bags, he thought a good business could be done, especially as people would not be particular to measure after a Quaker.</p>
			<p>“Do you mean to cheat in measuring your oats?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“O, I should probably make them hold out,” he answered, with a leer.</p>
			<p>One application came from a Pearl Street wool merchant, who failed a month afterwards. Then came a “perpetual motion” man who had a fortune-making machine, in which I discovered a mainspring slyly hid in a hollow post, the spring making perpetual motion⁠—till it ran down. Finally, I went into partnership with a German, named Proler, who was a manufacturer of paste-blacking, waterproof paste for leather, Cologne water and bear’s grease. We took the store <abbr>No.</abbr> 101½ Bowery, at a rent (including the dwelling) of $600 per annum, and opened a large manufactory of the above articles. Proler manufactured and sold the goods at wholesale in Boston, Charleston, Cleveland, and various other parts of the country. I kept the accounts, and attended to sales in the store, wholesale and retail. For a while the business seemed to prosper⁠—at least till my capital was absorbed and notes for stock began to fall due, with nothing to meet them, since we had sold our goods on long credits. In <time datetime="1840-01">January, 1840</time>, I dissolved partnership with Proler, he buying the entire interest for $2,600 on credit, and then running away to Rotterdam without paying his note, and leaving me nothing but a few recipes. Proler was a good-looking, plausible, promising⁠—scamp.</p>
			<p>During my connection with Proler, I became acquainted with a remarkable young dancer named John Diamond. He was one of the first and best of the numerous negro and “breakdown” dancers who have since surprised and amused the public, and I entered into an engagement with his father for his services, putting Diamond in the hands of an agent, as I did not wish to appear in the transaction. In the spring of <time datetime="1840">1840</time>, I hired and opened the Vauxhall Garden saloon, in New York, and gave a variety of performances, including singing, dancing, Yankee stories, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> In this saloon Miss Mary Taylor, afterwards so celebrated as an actress and singer, made her first appearance on the stage. The enterprise, however, did not meet my expectation and I relinquished it in <time datetime="1840-08">August</time>.</p>
			<p>What was to be done next? I dreaded resuming the life of an itinerant showman, but funds were low, I had a family to care for, and as nothing better presented I made up my mind to endure the vexations and uncertainties of a tour in the West and South. I collected a company, consisting of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. D.</abbr> Jenkins, an excellent singer and delineator of Yankee and other characters; Master John Diamond, the dancer; Francis Lynch, an orphan vagabond, fourteen years old, whom I picked up at Troy, and a fiddler. My brother-in-law, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Hallett, preceded us as agent and advertiser, and our route passed through Buffalo, Toronto, Detroit, Chicago, Ottawa, Springfield, the intermediate places, and <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, where I took the steamboat for New Orleans with a company reduced by desertions to Master Diamond and the fiddler.</p>
			<p>Arriving in New Orleans, <time datetime="1841-01-02">January 2, 1841</time>, I had but $100 in my purse, and I had started from New York four months before with quite as much in my pocket. Excepting some small remittances to my family I had made nothing more than current expenses; and, when I had been in New Orleans a fortnight, funds were so low that I was obliged to pledge my watch as security for my board bill. But on the <time datetime="1841-01-16">16th</time>, I received from the <abbr>St.</abbr> Charles Theater $500 as my half share of Diamond’s benefit; the next night I had $50; and the third night $479 was my share of the proceeds of a grand dancing match at the theater between Diamond and a negro dancer from Kentucky. Subsequent engagements at Vicksburg and Jackson were not so successful, but returning to New Orleans we again succeeded admirably and afterwards at Mobile. Diamond, however, after extorting considerable sums of money from me, finally ran away, and, <time datetime="1841-03-12">March 12th</time>, I started homeward by way of the Mississippi and the Ohio.</p>
			<p>While I was in New Orleans I made the acquaintance of that genial man, Tyrone Power, who was just concluding an engagement at the <abbr>St.</abbr> Charles Theater. In bidding me farewell, he wished me every success and hoped we should meet again. Alas, poor Power! All the world knows how he set sail from our shores, and he and his ship were never seen again. Fanny Ellsler was also in New Orleans, and when I saw seats in the dress circle sold at an average of four dollars and one-half, I gave her agent, Chevalier Henry Wyckoff, great credit for exciting public enthusiasm to the highest pitch and I thought the prices enormous. I did not dream then that, within twelve years, I should be selling tickets in the same city for full five times that sum.</p>
			<p>At Pittsburg, where I arrived <time datetime="1841-03-30">March 30th</time>, I learned that Jenkins, who had enticed Francis Lynch away from me at <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, was exhibiting him at the Museum under the name of “Master Diamond,” and visiting the performance, the next day I wrote Jenkins an ironical review for which he threatened suit and he actually instigated <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. W.</abbr> Lindsay, from whom I hired Joice Heth in Philadelphia in <time datetime="1835">1835</time>, and whom I had not seen since, though he was then residing in Pittsburg, to sue me for a pipe of brandy which, it was pretended, was promised in addition to the money paid him. I was required to give bonds of $500, which, as I was among strangers, I could not immediately procure, and I was accordingly thrown into jail till four o’clock in the afternoon, when I was liberated. The next day I caused the arrest of Jenkins for trespass in assuming Master Diamond’s name and reputation for Master Lynch, and he was sent to jail till four o’clock in the afternoon. Each having had his turn at this amusement, we adjourned our controversy to New York where I beat him. As for Lindsay, I heard nothing more of his claim or him till twelve years afterwards when he called on me in Boston with an apology. He was very poor and I was highly prosperous, and I may add that Lindsay did not lack a friend.</p>
			<p>I arrived in New York, <time datetime="1841-04-23">April 23rd, 1841</time>, after an absence of eight months; finding my family in good health, I resolved once more that I would never again be an itinerant showman. Three days afterwards I contracted with Robert Sears, the publisher, for five hundred copies of “Sears’ Pictorial Illustrations of the Bible,” at $500, and accepting the United States agency, I opened an office, <time datetime="1841-05-10">May 10th</time>, at the corner of Beekman and Nassau Streets, the site of the present Nassau Bank. I had had a limited experience with that book in this way: When I was in Pittsburg, an acquaintance, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. D.</abbr> Harker, was complaining that he had nothing to do, when I picked up a New York paper and saw the advertisement of “Sears’s Pictorial Illustrations of the Bible, price $2 a copy.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harker thought he could get subscribers, and I bought him a specimen copy, agreeing to furnish him with as many as he wanted at $1.37½ a copy, though I had never before seen the work and did not know the wholesale price. The result was that he obtained eighty subscribers in two days, and made $50. My own venture in the work was not so successful; I advertised largely, had plenty of agents, and, in six months, sold thousands of copies; but irresponsible agents used up all my profits and my capital.</p>
			<p>While engaged in this business I once more leased Vauxhall saloon, opening it <time datetime="1841-06-14">June 14th, 1841</time>, employing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Hallett, my brother-in-law, as manager under my direction, and at the close of the season, <time datetime="1841-09-25">September 25th</time>, we had cleared about two hundred dollars. This sum was soon exhausted, and with my family on my hands and no employment I was glad to do anything that would keep the wolf from the door. I wrote advertisements and notices for the Bowery Amphitheater, receiving for the service four dollars a week, which I was very glad to get, and I also wrote articles for the Sunday papers, deriving a fair remuneration and managing to get a living. But I was at the bottom round of fortune’s ladder, and it was necessary to make an effort which would raise me above want.</p>
			<p>I was specially stimulated to this effort by a letter which I received, about this time, from my esteemed friend, <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Thomas <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Whittlesey, of Danbury. He held a mortgage of five hundred dollars on a piece of property I owned in that place, and, as he was convinced that I would never lay up anything, he wrote me that I might as well pay him then as ever. This letter made me resolve to live no longer from hand to mouth, but to concentrate my energies upon laying up something for the future.</p>
			<p>While I was forming this practical determination I was much nearer to its realization than my most sanguine hopes could have predicted. The road to fortune was close by. Without suspecting it, I was about to enter upon an enterprise, which, while giving full scope for whatever tact, industry and pluck I might possess, was to take me from the foot of the ladder and place me many rounds above.</p>
			<p>As outside clerk for the Bowery Amphitheater I had casually learned that the collection of curiosities comprising Scudder’s American Museum, at the corner of Broadway and Ann Street, was for sale. It belonged to the daughters of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scudder, and was conducted for their benefit by John Furzman, under the authority of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Heath, administrator. The price asked for the entire collection was fifteen thousand dollars. It had cost its founder, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scudder, probably fifty thousand dollars, and from the profits of the establishment he had been able to leave a large competency to his children. The Museum, however, had been for several years a losing concern, and the heirs were anxious to sell it. Looking at this property, I thought I saw that energy, tact and liberality, were only needed to make it a paying institution, and I determined to purchase it if possible.</p>
			<p>“You buy the American Museum!” said a friend, who knew the state of my funds, “what do you intend buying it with?”</p>
			<p>“Brass,” I replied, “for silver and gold have I none.”</p>
			<p>The Museum building belonged to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Olmsted, a retired merchant, to whom I wrote stating my desire to buy the collection, and that although I had no means, if it could, be purchased upon reasonable credit, I was confident that my tact and experience, added to a determined devotion to business, would enable me to make the payments when due. I therefore asked him to purchase the collection in his own name; to give me a writing securing it to me provided I made the payments punctually, including the rent of his building; to allow me twelve dollars and a half a week on which to support my family; and if at any time I failed to meet the instalment due, I would vacate the premises and forfeit all that might have been paid to that date. “In fact, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted,” I continued in my earnestness, “you may bind me in any way, and as tightly as you please⁠—only give me a chance to dig out, or scratch out, and I will do so or forfeit all the labor and trouble I may have incurred.”</p>
			<p>In reply to this letter, which I took to his house myself, he named an hour when I could call on him, and as I was there at the exact moment, he expressed himself pleased with my punctuality. He inquired closely as to my habits and antecedents, and I frankly narrated my experiences as a caterer for the public, mentioning my amusement ventures in Vauxhall Garden, the circus, and in the exhibitions I had managed at the South and West.</p>
			<p>“Who are your references?” he inquired.</p>
			<p>“Any man in my line,” I replied, “from Edmund Simpson, manager of the Park Theater, or William Niblo, to <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Welch, June, Titus, Turner, Angevine, or other circus or menagerie proprietors; also Moses <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Y.</abbr> Beach, of the New York <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Sun</i>.</p>
			<p>“Can you get any of them to call on me?” he continued.</p>
			<p>I told him that I could, and the next day my friend Niblo rode down and had an interview with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beach and several other gentlemen also called, and the following morning I waited upon him for his decision.</p>
			<p>“I don’t like your references, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnum,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted, abruptly, as soon as I entered the room.</p>
			<p>I was confused, and said “I regretted to hear it.”</p>
			<p>“They all speak too well of you,” he added, laughing; “in fact they all talk as if they were partners of yours, and intended to share the profits.”</p>
			<p>Nothing could have pleased me better. He then asked me what security I could offer in case he concluded to make the purchase for me, and it was finally agreed that, if he should do so, he should retain the property till it was entirely paid for, and should also appoint a ticket-taker and accountant (at my expense), who should render him a weekly statement. I was further to take an apartment hitherto used as a billiard room in an adjoining building, allowing therefor, $500 a year, making a total rent of $3,000 per annum, on a lease of ten years. He then told me to see the administrator and heirs of the estate, to get their best terms, and to meet him on his return to town a week from that time.</p>
			<p>I at once saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Heath, the administrator, and his price was $15,000. I offered $10,000, payable in seven annual instalments, with good security. After several interviews, it was finally agreed that I should have it for $12,000, payable as above⁠—possession to be given on the <time datetime="1841-11-15">15th November</time>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted assented to this, and a morning was appointed to draw and sign the writings. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Heath appeared, but said he must decline proceeding any farther in my case, as he had sold the collection to the directors of Peale’s Museum (an incorporated institution), for $15,000, and had received $1,000 in advance.</p>
			<p>I was shocked, and appealed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Heath’s honor. He said that he had signed no writing with me; was in no way legally bound, and that it was his duty to do the best he could for the heirs. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted was sorry, but could not help me; the new tenants would not require him to incur any risk, and my matter was at an end.</p>
			<p>Of course, I immediately informed myself as to the character of Peale’s Museum company. It proved to be a band of speculators who had bought Peale’s collection for a few thousand dollars, expecting to join the American Museum with it, issue and sell stock to the amount of $50,000, pocket $30,000 profits, and permit the stockholders to look out for themselves.</p>
			<p>I went immediately to several of the editors, including Major <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. M.</abbr> Noah, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. Y.</abbr> Beach, my good friends West, Herrick and Ropes, of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Atlas</i>, and others, and stated my grievances. “Now,” said I, “if you will grant me the use of your columns, I’ll blow that speculation sky-high.” They all consented, and I wrote a large number of squibs, cautioning the public against buying the Museum stock, ridiculing the idea of a board of broken-down bank directors engaging in the exhibition of stuffed monkey and gander skins; appealing to the case of the Zoological Institute, which had failed by adopting such a plan as the one now proposed; and finally I told the public that such a speculation would be infinitely more ridiculous than Dickens’s “Grand United Metropolitan Hot Muffin and Crumpet-baking and Punctual Delivery Company.”</p>
			<p>The stock was as “dead as a herring!” I then went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Heath and asked him when the directors were to pay the other $14,000. “On the <time datetime="1841-12-26">26th day of December</time>, or forfeit the $1,000 already paid,” was the reply. I assured him that they would never pay it, that they could not raise it, and that he would ultimately find himself with the Museum collection on his hands, and if once I started off with an exhibition for the South, I would not touch the Museum at <em>any</em> price. “Now,” said I, “if you will agree with me confidentially, that in case these gentlemen do not pay you on the <time datetime="1841-12-26">26th of December</time>, I may have it on the <time datetime="1841-12-27">27th</time> for $12,000, I will run the risk, and wait in this city until that date.” He readily agreed to the proposition, but said he was sure they would not forfeit their $1,000.</p>
			<p>“Very well,” said I; “all I ask of you is, that this arrangement shall not be mentioned.” He assented. “On the <time datetime="1841-12-27 10:00">27th day of December</time>, at ten o’clock <abbr>a.m.</abbr>, I wish you to meet me in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted’s apartments, prepared to sign the writings, provided this incorporated company do not pay you $14,000 on the <time datetime="1841-12-26">26th</time>.” He agreed to this, and by my request put it in writing.</p>
			<p>From that moment I felt that the Museum was mine. I saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Olmsted, and told him so. He promised secrecy, and agreed to sign the documents if the other parties did not meet their engagement.</p>
			<p>This was about <time datetime="1841-11-15">November 15th</time>, and I continued my shower of newspaper squibs at the new company, which could not sell a dollar’s worth of its stock. Meanwhile, if anyone spoke to me about the Museum, I simply replied that I had lost it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
